## Page 1

First
Page of
ECE 110 TERM TEST 2
2024-03-12
write as possible
the
name



## Page 2

University of Toronto
Faculty Of Applied Science and Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI 10S — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test 2 - March 12, 2024
p.m. (1.5 hours)
1.6 • 8.85 Elm, = Wm,g 29.8 m,'s')
Instructions:
I. Exam one-page (SS" x II") double-sidedaid sheet is alloued. This aid
sheet may he handwritten or computer.genented. including typewritten text.
images, Or other formats that fit within the paper. Using the template from F ASEs
website is not mandatory
2. Non-programmablc calculators (e.g. Casio FX-991MS Sharp El—S20X) are
permitted.
3. please use a dark pen or and ensure your handwriting is Clear. as
will scanned for grading.
4. For full marks, you must show methods, state UNITS, and compute numerical
answers when requested.
5. An extra blank page is prmided at the end. If you use this page for your ansuers,
make sure to clearly indicate this within the relevant question to ensure IS
considered during the grading process.
6- TAs and instructors CANNOT ansuer inquiries regarding the exam questions. If
you are unsure about the question. please State your assumptions in your answer,



## Page 3

Fage 3 ot
QI. Consider an infinitely long wire consisting of two concentric components. An inner
solid cylinder With radius z I and a hollow cylindrical Shell with an outer radius
ofrz 3 (cml. The current density within each component is defined by
250 [a (positive x•direetion) and (2) 500 x-direction). Assume
an infinitesimally thin insulating layer Frtween thc V,vo comm»nents of the wire.
Insulating layer
a) Determine the radius within the wire where the magnetic field is zero 13 marksl_
= aogChJ
•z(r-2-Q012)



## Page 4

•SIE rage 4
QI continued.
of
b) The infinitely long wire is then positioned above a magnetic field ( B
3.5 x 10-7 IT] which isdefined within therectangulararea(w 3 1m], h = I The
direction Of the magnetic field is pointing out Of the planc I-direction), Calculate
thc magnitude and direction of thc magrrtic force exerted on thc wire- 14 marksl.
Wire
i. NJ apos



## Page 5

QI continued.
C) Consider a System 2 parallel Wires are l«ated above the uniform magnetic field
(B = 3S x 10 ITI rectangular area (w = 3 Iml,h = 1 where wire 2 is fixed in
place and both arc separated hy a distance (d 40 the current flowing
through wire I is [AJ x-direction), "hat Current is needed in Wire 2 to prevent
the first wire from moving? 13 marksl
wire 2
S 10
gad = 7[A] Gej



## Page 6

'SIE 6 ot
02. A conductive U•shaßd railing is placed in the x-y planc as shown below. A movable
(couching the railing) is initially located parallel to the y-xvis at x = O At
t O the metal rod StartS to move in the positive with a constant speed. u
[Ws). A infinite long straight Wire carrying a current, i(t) 2t IA] lies parallel to thc x-
axis -L
a) Determine the magnitude ofthe magnetic flux through the closed area formed between
the conductive railing and the metal rod as a function of time. 16 marksl
ver. J
o



## Page 7

Page 7
Q2 continued.
b) Find the magnitude Of the induced emf in the conductive path formed by the railing and
the rod. 12 marksl
c) Circle thc direction of the induced current in the conductive path. 12 marksl
Clockwise



## Page 8

8 of IC
Q3. Consider the circuit below.
a) If VA O determine Vx II markl
b) If VA = 8 [VI, determine Vx 16 marksl
-JDL



## Page 9

Q3 continued.
14-1/2 v,
8
vy-vs
Vz-vg—VÄ
A.
Page 9 of
LfCV3
c) If VA = 8 determine the rmv•er of the voltage-controlled voltage source 12 marksl.
IS it being supplied or Circle one answer II
Supplied



## Page 10

*516 ot 10
Illis page is intentionally left blank. You may use this sheet for rough work.


