## Page 1

1 
 
 
University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
 
ECE110S – Electrical Fundamentals 
Term Test 2 – March 17, 2016, 6:30 – 8:00 p.m. 
 
(e = 1.6 ×10-19 C, ε0 = 8.85 ×10-12 F/m, μ0 = 4π×10-7 H/m, g = 9.81 N/kg) 
 
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS, USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY. 
1.   Non-programmable calculators (Casio FX-991MS & Sharp EL-520X) are allowed. 
2. For full marks, you must show methods, state UNITS and compute numerical answers when  requested. 
3. Write in PEN. Otherwise, no remarking request will be accepted. 
4. There is one extra blank page at the end for rough work. 
 
 
 
 
Last Name: ____________________________________________________ 
 
 
First Name:  ____________________________________________________ 
 
 
Student Number: ________________________________________________ 
 
Tutorial Section: 
 (YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY) 
 
 
 
 
 
01 SF2202 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
 
Question 
Mark 
 
02 HA403 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
 
 
03 SF2202 
Tue. 4-6 p.m. 
 
 
1 
 
 
04 SF2202 
Wed. 3-5 p.m. 
 
 
05 SF2202 
Mon. 1-3 p.m. 
 
2 
 
 
06 GB404 
Wed. 12-2 p.m. 
 
 
07 RS310 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
 
3 
 
 
08 SF2202 
Wed. 9-11 a.m. 
 
 
09 GB304 
Tue. 10-12 p.m. 
 
TOTAL 
 
 
 
10 GB248 
Fri. 3-5 p.m. 
 
 
11 GB303 
Tue. 3-5 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
12 RS310 
Tue. 3-5 p.m.


## Page 2

2 
 
 
Q1 [10 marks] The following circuit consists of two loops that are coupled magnetically by a coil placed 
within a solenoid. The solenoid (10,000 turns, radius of 4.5 cm, and length of 20 cm) in Loop A is connected 
in series with a time-varying current source (Isource = 10 sin(t) A). Loop B consists of a coil (40 turns, cross 
sectional area of 2 cm2) placed within the center of the solenoid, and connected in series to a resistor (R = 
100 Ω). Assume all circuit elements are ideal. 
 
 
 
a) Use Ampere’s law to derive the relationship between the magnetic field (B) induced within a solenoid and 
the electrical current provided by the current source (Isource). (3 marks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Isource ~ 
Loop A                          Loop B 
R 
Solenoid  
 
 
 
 
Coil


## Page 3

3 
 
 
Q1 continue 
 
b) For the given sinusoidal current waveform, Isource = 10 sin(t) A, calculate the power consumed by the 
resistor in Loop B at t = (π/4) radians. (4 marks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Let us suppose that a second set of solenoid (10,000 turns, radius of 4.5 cm, and length of 20 cm) & coil 
(cross sectional area of 2 cm2) has been connected in series to the existing set.  If the power consumption by 
the resistor in Loop B is measured to be half of the value obtained in part b), how many turns should the coil 
have? (3 marks)


## Page 4

4 
 
 
Q2 [10 marks] Consider the following resistive circuit and do the required computations in fractional rather 
than decimal form 
4 kΩ 
5 kΩ 
4 kΩ 
4 kΩ 
3 kΩ 
6 kΩ 
1 kΩ 
5 V
RAB
A
B
 
 
a) Find the equivalent resistance RAB as seen by the 5V battery. (4 marks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Compute the total power dissipated in the resistive network. (2 marks)


## Page 5

5 
 
 
Q2 continue 
 
c) What is the current in the 6 kΩ resistor? (4 marks)


## Page 6

6 
 
 
Q3 [10 marks]  
0.45 A
45 V
Ix
+
_
+
_
+
_
100 Ω 
25 Ω 
5 Ω 
6.25 Ix
Vo
+
_
 
 
a) Use either nodal or mesh method to find Vo and Ix in the circuit. (5 marks)


## Page 7

7 
 
 
Q3 continue 
 
b) Find the power absorbed by the dependent source. (2 marks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) Find the total power supplied by the independent sources. (3 marks)


## Page 8

*No text found*

