## Page 1

of T 10
Faculty of Applied Sci:ncc and Engineering
Department Of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECE I IOS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test 2 -March 20, 2018. p.m.
(e = 1.6 N/kg)
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY.
Non-programmablc calculators (Casio FX-991MS & Sharp EL-520X) are
You arc a (85" I l") double-sided aid sheet.
full mMkS, you must Show methods, state UNITS compute numerical answers requested.
Write in PEN. Otherwise. no remarking request Will be
There is one extra blank page at thc for rough work.
Last Name
First Name:
Student N umber:
Tutorial Section;
Full
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY)
0 01
02
03
04
05
06
07
09
010
12
WB342
HA403
HA 403
HA403
GB405
BA1240
SF3202
BA1200
LM162
SS2135
W'B119
Wed. 4-6
Mon. 12-2 p.m.
Thurs 12-2 pm
Fri 4-6 p.m.
wed. 12-2p.m.
Tues. 3-5
Fri. 4-6 p.m.
Fri. 4-6
Mon, 4-6 p.m.
TOTAL
Thurs I -3 pm.
Thurs. I p.m.
Fri. 12-2



## Page 2

QI 110 marks'
Loop Arca = A
figure above shows a Single loop A, immersed a uniform magnetic field
B (device is actually a generator). The angle between the loop and magnetic field changes with time
according to COSWt Where is a constant as angular [rad/sl is time
(a) Give the expression for thc magnitule ofthc induced current through the resistor R. (6 marks)
ßAcos
ICl



## Page 3

Q continued
(b) instead of a single loop. N Were used, how the result in part (a) Change? (2 marks)
(c) During the period ofO < t < what is the direction ofthe induced current in the metallic loop? Draw
the current arrow on the loop indicating thc direction of the current. (2 marks)



## Page 4

02 110
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
XXXxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxx
xxxxxxx
XxxxXXXXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXX:xxxxx
xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
xxxxxxx xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
XXXxxxxxxxxxxxXxXxXXXKXX
Consider the two examples above in which we Can magnetically currents through a Simple
resistive Circuit In both induced current is by an ammeter in series Within
each respective resistive circuit, We assume that the ammeter does not affect any ofthe circuits.
In example A. a square coil ( I O Cm x 10 em) is pulled through a uniform magnetic field (2.5 T,
directed into pagc) a' a velocity,
In example B, there is an inner coil centered within an outer solenoid Thc outer solnoid has 10,000
turns. radius of 4, 5 Cm. length Of 20 the inner coil has 40 turns and a diameter Of I .2
(a) Calculate thc current (IA) measured in the resistive circuit in example A. (3 marks)



## Page 5

02
(b) In example A. determine the and Of the external that must bc to the
square coil. (3 marks)
(c) Determine the input current in example a, such that
e
—o 1.25 V
(4 marks)



## Page 6

(a) Use either nodal or mesh analysis to find Vo in the circuit. (6 marks)
2bt& ±
03
2kQ/x +
Vo=12V
2k0
4kQ
12V
2kQ
KVLQ
k + 20
—12 4kCJz -O
k 12 V
2K



## Page 7

Q3 continued
(b) Compute in the 4k_Q resistor (l mark)
(C) Compute power the dependent (l
-7amW
(d) Compute in the independent source. ( I mark)
= 12 •-1*
(e) Compute the pwer in the two 2kQ resistors (I mark)
p=V1



## Page 8

*No text found*

