## Page 1

University of Toronto
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI IOS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test 2 - March 24, 2022, 7:00 - 8:30 p.m.
(e- 1.6 N/'xg)
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS. USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY.
I. Non-programmable calculators (Casio FXA)91MS & Shurp EL-520X) are allowed.
2. You iTeaIImved a one page (8.5" x II") double-sided aid sheet.
3. For full marks, you must show state UNITS and compute numerical answers
4. There is one extra blank page at the end for Lough work,



## Page 2

QI) Consider the following circuit (A-B-C•D) that consists ofa voltage soutee V(t) and a
resistor The segment .ulnccting nodes A and B overlaps with a unifi3rm magnetic
feld (B = 2.5 mT) pointing into x-y plane. The B ficld is confined within the square area,
•txre a = 30 cm.
a) Determine the for S V Of 7.5 tnN on
SCgnxnt Of Wire that with thc 13
b) What is thc direction in the wire is displaced by the field when V(t) 12



## Page 3

QI cont.) The circuit is modified such that a segment of thc wire nodes C and D forms a
semi-circle in the x-y plane, with a diameter of h e 40 There isa single wire loop (area =
0.01 m2) placed thc center ofthe semi-circle and connected to a sccond resistor (R2).
RI
c
Wire loop
•5 V, What is the direction of the magnetic field at the center of the loop wire? (2
marks)
d) IfV(t) incleascs from OV to +5V over a period of I S, what is the direction ofthe
electromotive force around the wire loop? 13 marks]
(i) clockwise direction
(ii) counter-c•lockwisc direction



## Page 4

Q2) For the circuit slwwn below, V'. is given in volts.
4b'x
IOV +
a) Compute V. [5 marks]
b) Compute the power in resistor RL Is it absorbed or supplied? mark)



## Page 5

c) Compute the power in the independent voltage source. Is it absorbed or supplied? 12 marks]
Compute the power in voltage IS it or supplied? 12



## Page 6

Q3) Solve the following circuits:
a) Find 10 in thc network using the homogcncity (scaling) property of linear systems.
[5 marks]



## Page 7

(b) Find 10 in the network below using the superposition (additivity) propcrty of linear systems.
[5 marks]



## Page 8

For Extru work
Q3U))



## Page 9

ot 10


