## Page 1

University of Toronto
Faculty of Science Engineering
Department Of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI I OS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Tesl 1 -February 12, 2019,
(e - c, Eo = 8.85 H.'m, g - 9.81 N/kg)
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS. USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY.
Non•programmablc calculators (Casio MS & Sharp are allowed.
You are allowed a one page (8S' x I I chuble-sided aid sheet.
. For full marks. y Ou Show methods. State UN ITS and compute numerical answers (When requested).
Write in PEN. Otherwise, no remarking request Will accepted.
There is one extra blank at the end mugh
Last N
o I OnS
Tutorial Section:
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR 111TORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY)
0 01
02
03
C] 04
C] 06
C] 08
Cl 09
Ü 10
HS106
G B404
GB404
GB248
MP137
SF32m
MY3 SO
IOS
Wed. 4-6 p , IL
Wed. 12•2 p.m.
Wed. 4-6 p.m.
Fri. 10•12 p.m.
4-6 pm
Fri. 12-2p.tr„
Thurs. p.m.
wed. 12-2 p.m.
TOTAL
Wed. p.m.
Wed, 4-6 p



## Page 2

QI marksJ Circle the correct answer in each ofthe following question.
1.1 Which one of the following Statements conceming thc electric force is true? (I mark)
A) Two charged objects with i&ntical charges Will exert an attractive force on one another.
It is possible for a small negatively charged particle to float above a negatively charged
C) A positively charged object is attracted toward another positively-charged object.
D) electric C.anm•t alter thc m Otion Of an Obj
E) Newton 's third law of motion not apply to the electrostatic force.
1.2 A charged particle, Iakxlcd A, is located at the midpoint between two other charged particles,
labeled B and C. Sign Of the Charges on all three particles is the same. When particle A is
released, it stans drifting toward B. What can determined from this behavior'? (I mark)
A) charge on A is larger than B.
B) Charge 0M A is larger than the Charge C.
C The charge on C is larger than the charge on B.
D) -Ille chargc on B is larger than thc charge on A.
E) charge on B is larger than Charge on C.
1.3 Two protons (p, and p:) arc on the x axis, as shown Iklow. Thc directions of the electric
field at points I. 2, and 3 respectively. arc; (l mark)
2



## Page 3

1.4 Which one ofthe follcrwing statements descritrs concept ofthe electric field? (I
mark)
A) field is a Vector quantity that is thc reaction Of electrons.
B) The electric field at each point is potential energy ofa test charge divided by the amount
of the test charge.
C) electric field is a distribution of at points due to the Of more
reed objects.
D) electric field is a scalar quantity related to the amount Of on Or more
charged objects.
E) Thc electric field is a scalar field, which has a magnitude at each given point, similar to the
or field.
I.S Consider the three c h in drawings A and B The values Of thc Charges are
x 10-7 C; qa +2 IO- C; qi = —2 x 10-7 C. In drawing A, a Gaussian surface surrounds
charge q l; and in drawing B. thc all three Charges. Which Of the
following statements concerning the electric flux through thc two Gaussian surfaces is true? (I
A) 'lhe flux through thc Gaussian surface in drawing A is than the through
Gaussian in drawing B,
B) Ihe flux through the Gaussian surface in drawing A is the same as the flux through the
n surface in drawing B.
C) flux the Gaussian surface in drawing A is less than thc through the
Gaussian surface in drawing B.
1.6 A point charge is placed at the center of a spherical Gaussian surface. Thc electric flux is
changed if. (l mark)
A) is a of the
B) is by a cube Ofone.tcnth the volutne
C) Thc point Charge is moved off (but Still the original
) point charge is mcwcd to outside the sphere
E) A second point Charge is just outside thc



## Page 4

The flux of the electric field (24 NC) (16 NC) through a 2.0 portion Of
thcyz plane is: (2 marks)
A) 32N
B) 34N.m2/C
C) 42N-m2/C
48 N •
1.8 A 3.5-cm radius hemisphere contains a total charge of" x 10-1 C. Ihe flux through
rounded portion of thc surface is 9. g x through the nat base (2 marks)
3.5 cm
A) OVm2\C
B) +2.3* 10' N•m2/C
C) -9.8 x IOANm2,'C
D) +9.8 x



## Page 5

a) Consider a circuit (sec diagrwn that consists Of a battery 5 V in with a
resistor is a solid with a given resistivity, 2x10¯4n.m, diameter = I and
that have a
= 2 cm. Of the battery is to the resistor via cylindrical
radius = I mm resistivity, IXIO¯Sibn. Calculate the current through
thc Of battery] (4 marks)
Hint: The total resistance of rsistances connected in series
2cm
— = O. 3an
Ran
= (a 310
v
_ — = 0.79A



## Page 6

b) If a capacitor consists of parallel disks 5 separated by I mm md With a
cemic material (dielectric constant imted between the disks, charge stored
on a paentW Of 4.7S V is 4431ied across this (2 marks)
33nc
C) Consider the circuits where the capwitance Of individual is 10 nF. If
V, 4.75 V, detamine Vi such that same —t charge (q) is stMed in both
which circuit more to st«e q. and by much? (4
+ cvz
vz=2Vl = q.sv
cvt-
(12.8<
225.cns



## Page 7

marks'
a) Figure a copper plate carrying a uniform current immersed in a field
the electrostatic votential (U) between thc right left Sides Of the
B. A voltmeter is to
plate. Is voltage •t the right Sidc higher, o. same, thc side?
y Our (3 m arks)
—lel$exß
Left S i dc
b) A Wire R has a current &nsity
by J thm the figure. is a the
caries total current of L Derive an for the magnitude of the
magnetic field B, in the region O r S R, in terms of l. r. R
(7 m ark')
g.ds
Bids s
65 3R
Right Side


