## Page 1

*515 Page of 10
ECE 110 TERM TEST 2
2024-03-12
s Zeg±bly ag the
Last name
Student



## Page 2

page
2 of 10
University of Toronto
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI IOS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test 2 - March 12, 2024
l: 10— 2:40 p.m. (1.5 hours)
(e = 1.6
Instructions:
l. Exam Type CN (8.5" x I I") double-sided aid sheet is allowed. This aid
sheet may handMitten or computer•generaled, including tyvx•writtcn
images. or other formats that fit within the Using the template from F ASEs
website is not mandatory,
2. Non-programmable (e.g., Casio FX•991MS & Sharp EL-S20X)
permitted.
3. please use a dark pen or pemil handwriting is as
will be scanned for grading.
4. For fiAI marks, you must show methods, state UNITS, and compute numerical
answers when requested.
5. An extra blank page is provided at the end. If you use this page for your ansm:rS,
make sure to clearly indicate this within the relevant question area to ensure it is
considered during the grading process.
6 _ TAs and instructors CANNOT answer inquiries regarding the exam questions. If
you are unsure about the question. please state your asstmtptions in your answer.



## Page 3

Pag, of
QI. Consider an infinitely lcmg wire consisting of two «ulccntric components. An inner
solid cylinder with radius
= I a hollow cylindrical Shell With an Outer
3 lcm], Thc current density within each component is defined by (I) =
250 (positive x-direction) and 500 (negative x-direction). Assume
an infinitesimally thin insulating layer Ixtween the two comgxments of the wire.
Insulabng layer
a) Detemine the radius Within the wire where the magnetic field is zero 13 marksl ,
t.a3cm



## Page 4

page of
QI continud
b) The infinitely long wire is then positioned abcwc a uniform magnetic field (B
3.5 x 10-3 [Tl Which is defined within the rectangular arca (w = 3 [rnl,h I The
magnetic field is pointing out Of the plane (positive Calculate
the magnitude and direction of the magnetic rorce exerted on the wire. 14 marks'.
Wire



## Page 5

#515 Page 5
QI continued.
of 10
C) Consider a System 2 parallel are the field
( B = 3.5 x 10-7 IT] j, rectangular area (w 3 1m], h = I wherewire 2 is fixed in
place and both wires are separated by a distance (d 40 [cmlb. If thc current flowing
through wirc I is 0.2 [A1 (pcsitivex•direction), what current is needed in wire 2 to prevent
the first wire from moving? 13 marksl
-K dir)



## Page 6

xs92
10
02. A U-shaped railing is placed in the plane as below. A movable
metal (touching the railing) is initially located parallel to the y-axis at x = O [m], At
the metal rod starts to in the X•direction wilh a u
(mis). A infinite long straight wire carrying a current. i(t) = Zt [A1 lies parallel to thc x-
a) Determine the magnitude ofthe magnetic flux through the closed area formed between
the conductive railing and the metal rod as a function of time. 16 marksl



## Page 7

*515 of 10
Q2 continued.
b) Find the magnitude of the induced emf in the conductive path formed by the railing and
the rod. 12 marksl
c) Circle the direction of the induced current in the conductive path. 12 marksl
co I OCkWise



## Page 8

•SIS page 8 of
QS Consider the circuit below.
a) IfVA
b) If VA
= O [VI, determine Vx II markl
VA -otvl
= 8 determine Vx 16 marksl
Vx=av
14 = av



## Page 9

page 9
Q3 continued.
c) If VA = 8 [VI, determine the power Of thc voltage source 12 marksl.
Is it being supplied or absorbed? Circle one answer (I markl
Supplied
Absorbed



## Page 10

#515 page of
This page is intentionally left blank. You may use this sheet for rough work.


