## Page 1

University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
ECE110S -Electrical Fundamentals 
Term Test 1- February 15, 2017, 6:30- 8:00p.m. 
(e = 1.6 xl0-19 C, s0 = 8.85 x10-12 F/m, µo= 4rrxl0-7 H/m, g =9.81 N!kg) 
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS, USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY. 
1. Non-programmable calculators (Casio FX-991MS & Sharp EL-520X) are allowed. 
2. For full marks, you must show methods, state UNITS and compute numerical answers when requested. 
3. Write in PEN. Otherwise, no remarking request will be accepted. 
4. There is one extra blank page at the end for rough work. 
Last Name: 
Student Number: 
Tutorial Section: 
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY) 
D 
01 
GB404 
Mon. 3-5 p.m. 
D 
02 
SF2202 
Mon. 3-5 p.m. 
D 
03 
WB342 
Thu. 12-2 p.m. 
[ 
Question 
Mark I 
D 
04 
WB342 
Thu. 4-6 p.m. 
D 
05 
GB404 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
1 
I 
D 
06 
GB304 
Thu. 12-2 p.m. 
D 
07 
WB341 
Tue. 3-5 p.m. 
D 
08 
SF2202 
Wed. 10-12 p.m. 
D 
09 
GB405 
Tue. 12-2 p.m. 
D 
10 
BA1240 
Tue. 3-5 p.m. 
D 
11 
SF2202 
Fri. 9-11 a.m. 
2 
I 
3 __JI 
I 
TOTAL 
II 
I 
D 
12 
SF2202 
Wed. 4-6 p.m.


## Page 2

Ql [10 marks] 
a) [4 marks] Figure shows a uniform electric field E = '13 J + k penetrating through the top surface of a 
box (box itself is not shown) with dimensions a = 3m by b = 4m which is located in the x-y plane. What is 
the value and sign of electric flux through the top surface? 
z 
cp -
..--
--
y 
~A 
I Z }J ~/c 
F. 
y 
')


## Page 3

b) [6 marks] Positive charges q1 = q2 = 2 nC are placed at the vertices of a triangle as shown. A charge 
q (positive or negative) is to be placed inside the triangle (as shown) such that it experiences no net force. 
What should be the value and sign of charge q3? 
Note: qi, q2, and q3 are stationary. 
y 
; 
d /. 
q 
q1 
qz 
a


## Page 4

Q2 r10 marks] 
There are 2 infmite non-conducting sheets, each with a surface charge density o of -2 C/nl. The first sheet 
resides on the x-y plane (i.e. the plane described by the equation z = O); the second sheet resides on the y-z 
plane (i.e. the plane described by the equation x = 0). All positions are defined in Cartesian coordinates 
(x,y,z). 
y 
3 
(3,3,3) 
3 
,,... ________ )( 
a) [2 marks] State the position(s) where a -1 C charge has the greatest electric potential energy. 
b) [3 marks) A-1 C charge moves from the position (1,0,1) to (3,0,3). What is the electric potential 
energy difference? 
4


## Page 5

c) 12 marks] A-1 C charge moves from the position (1,0,l) to (3,3,3). What is the electric potential energy 
difference? 
d) f3 marks] A+ 1 C charge moves from the position (3,3,3) to (1,0,3). \/\That is the potential difference 
(i.e. voltage)'? 
s


## Page 6

Q3 [10 marks] 
Consider a parallel plate capacitor, which consists of two conducting plates, each with an area A= 4 cni 
and separated by a distance d of 0.2 cm. The capacitor is connected to a battery with output voltage, 
V = 5.2 Vas shown in the figure below. 
Switch 
1 
C1 
A 
V 
+ 
td 
C2 
C3 
a) [2 marks) Calculate the energy stored in the parallel plate capacitor when the capacitor is connected 
directly to the battery. 
b) [2 marks} The parallel plate capacitor, in part a), is then disconnected from the battery. A dielectric, 
with dielectric constant k = 8, is inserted between the plates. Calculate the new energy stored in the 
capacitor?


## Page 7

c) [6 marks] The parallel plate capacitor, in part b), with the dielectric in place, is then connected to the 
bank of capacitors shown on the right hand side of the figure. The capacitors have values of Cl = 5 pF, C2 
= 6 pF, and C3 = 9 pF. Calculate the charge stored in Cl and the fmal voltage across the parallel plate 
capacitor. 
7


## Page 8

*No text found*

