## Page 1

'659 page
ECE 110 TERM TEST 1
2024-02-08
First
(please
legibly a
s possible
within the boxes'
snuaams••••••••
stLKlent ID



## Page 2

University of Toronto
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI I OS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test I — February 2024
7:10 —8:40 p.m. (1.5 hours)
(e=1.6 C,
Instructions:
9.8 'Ws:)
Exam CS : a (8.5" x I I double-sided aid Sheet is This aid
Sheet may hand"Tittcn or computer-generated. including typewritten text.
images, or other formats that fit within the paJxr. Using the template from F ASEs
is not mandatory.
Non•programmable calculators (Casio FX-991MS Sharp EL-520X) are
permitted
Please use a dark pen or pencil and ensure your handwriting is clear. as thc paFr
Will scanned grading.
For full you must Show state UNITS. and compute
answers when requested.
. An extra blank page is provided at the end. If you use this page for your answers.
make Sure to clearly indicate this the relevant question to ensure it is
considered during the grading process.
. TAs and instructors CANNOT ansuer inquiries regarding thc exam questions. If
you are unsure about thc question, please state your assumptions in your answer.



## Page 3

page 3
QI. Ihe capacitor c I acquires a charge of Qo when connected to a battery of voltage Vo as
six»wn in the figure when switch is in Ekisition ll.en the switch is moved to
2 connecting C, to the initially uncharged capacitors C: and cs.
a) Derive an expression for the voltage across C; in terms Of Q', C', C2 and C3. 14 marksl
= (C, +43) V
43
cooca
40 cz
C2C3



## Page 4

page 4
Q I continued.
of 10
b) If C, is a cylindrical capacitor with a length of 3.6 cm, inner and outer conductor radii
of I mm and 5 mm, respectively. Compute C'. II markl
1
= 1.2qapF
c) IfC2 is a parallel plate capacitor with plate area of 2 and plate separation of I mm,
and is a parallel plate capacitor similar to C: except it has a dielectric with dielectric
constant of 3 between the plates. Compute C: and C', 12 marks'
d) If the battery voltage Vo is 5 volts. Compute the energy stored in C2 and the voltage
across C,. 13 marks'
Cz±C3
40
V Qi
2C2
3
c,



## Page 5

E.
Q2. Consider a stationary non-conducting spherical shell, with a radius of 1 m that has a
negative Charge Luliformly distributed its surface. AS in the figuJV, a negatively
charged panicle with a charge ql —5 x 10-8 C and a mass of 5 x kg is
by thin that is I m in length. The angle O the thread
and the vertical axis is 30t The origin or the coordinate system is set at the center of the
spherical shell. An infinitely large unifcmnly charged non-condwcting is positioned
3 m amy from the origin (r 3 m) in parallel with they* plane (shown in cross-section
in the figure below). Assume gravitational acceleration is 98 rn/s•. The z•xis is
perpendicular to the page with the positive direction coming out of the
a) What is the surface charge density of the sheet ? 16 marks'



## Page 6

#659 page 6
Q2 continued.
b) Now consider adding a uniformly charged, non-conducting, infinitely-long line placed
along the z-axis, centered at thc cocydinates (10.0.0), If qt is located at the origin of the
ccMdinate system What is the linc charge density A? 14 marksl



## Page 7

"sg Page of 10
Q3. Figure show a non-conducting uniformly charged shell of radius Ra = 2 cm with
— -4. A uniformly charged solid SE*tere has charge density p
charge density (J — —
.with I is ICE,atCd inside the Shell and is co•centered With it. A
positive point charge q = I nC is located at L = 10 Alloftheabovechargesare fixed
in position.
a) We wish to place a positive charge qo outside of the shell such that qo is at equilibrium.
Calculate the location at which qo must be placed Show all your work and justify your
answer. 17 marksl
_ Lnc
of sjr- of
C) = L acccp-kbk



## Page 8

Q3 continued.
b) With qo in place, and assuming qo I nC, what is total electrostatic potential (voltage)
at the Ick•ation p, where p is 2 cm to thc right ofthe charge q. 13 marksl
cup
Us-a. qz



## Page 9

9 of 10
This page is intentionally left blank. You may use this sheet for rough work.



## Page 10

•659 Page 0:


