## Page 1

1 
University of Toronto  
Edward S. Rogers Sr. Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering  
ECE 110H1 SU (summer) – Electrical Fundamentals – 2016  
Course Management Form  
 
Instructor:  
Dr. Hamid Timorabadi, P. Eng. 
Email:  
h.timorabadi@utoronto.ca 
Criteria for Emails: 
 
Subject area of the email should include course name and intention, e.g. 
o ECE110: Mark Error 
 
Office Hours: 
 
Best time to ask question is after the lectures, or 
 
Wednesdays 11 AM in lecture room. 
 
Lectures: 
 
Wednesdays  
 
9 – 11 AM  
 
BA1210 
 
Thursdays 
 
4:30 - 6:30 PM  
BA1210 
 
Fridays  
 
9 - 11 AM 
 
BA1210 
 
Course Description 
A study of the physics of electricity and magnetism: Coulomb’s law, Gauss’ laws, Biot-
Savart’s law, Ampere’s law, Faraday’s law, potentials and energy. An introduction to circuit 
analysis: resistive circuits; nodal and mesh analyses; Thevenin and Norton theorems; first-
order RC and RL circuits and sinusoidal steady-state analysis of AC circuits.  
 
Textbook 
Custom print - Electrical Fundamentals: (selected chapters) Fundamentals of Physics by D. 
Halliday, R. Resnick, J. Walker (10th ed., Wiley, 2014) and Basic Engineering Circuit 
Analysis by J.D. Irwin, R.M. Nelms (10th ed., Wiley, 2011). 
- 
Option 1:   
hardcopy text with WileyPLUS  
ISBN: 9781119061434 
- 
Option 2:   
 
              WileyPLUS 
ISBN: 9781119060697   
 
Tutorials  
 
A weekly tutorial will provide the students with the opportunity to review the material 
covered in lectures, and discuss some end of chapter problems.  Tutorials start on 
Wednesday May 18.   
      
Thursdays  
6:30-8:30 PM  BA1210 
TUT0101: TA:  
Fahimeh Kazempour 
 
f.kazempour@mail.utoronto.ca 
 
Thursdays  
6:30-8:30 PM  BA2185 
TUT0102: TA:  
Ali Ramezanikebrya 
 
aramezani@ece.utoronto.ca 
 
There will be a quiz during the tutorials as scheduled in the following Table.  
May 26 
Quiz #1 
June 02 
Quiz #2 
June 09 
Quiz #3 
June 16 
Quiz #4


## Page 2

2 
Laboratory  
  
The laboratory sessions will be held in the Instrumentation Lab (GB341). Each student is 
expected to maintain a bound lab book that includes the preparation and documentation of all 
work done in the laboratory. The lab book is to be updated continually during each lab 
session and to include all measured data, tables, graphs, and descriptions of relevant 
measurement techniques, computation, and conclusions.  The lab book will be evaluated by a 
teaching assistant during each lab session. There are five laboratory sessions starting start on 
Friday May 20.  During the first lab session, students will have the option of choosing their 
own lab partners from the same lab section (groups of two students).  
  
 
Lab Location: GB341 
Lab Hours: 11 AM- 1 PM 
TAs: 
 
Ali Ramezani-Kebrya: 
aramezani@ece.utoronto.ca 
 
Sadegh Dadash:  
sadegh.dadash@mail.utoronto.ca 
 
Wanyu Lin: 
 
wylin@ece.utoronto.ca 
 
Fahimeh Kazempour 
f.kazempour@mail.utoronto.ca 
 
Wilfred Cho  
 
wilfredcho@gmail.com 
 
Lab Schedules 
May 20 
Introductory Lab 
Equipment Exploration 
May 27 
Experiment #1 
Electrical Charges 
June 03 
Experiment #2 
Magnetism and Induction 
June 10 
Experiment #3 
DC Circuits 
June 17 
Experiment #4 
AC Measurements 
 
 
Mark Distribution:  
  
Laboratories 
 
20%  
 
Quizzes  
 
30%   
 
Final Exam 
 
50% 
Total   
 
100% 
 
Quizzes/Final Exam Type 
Type: 
 
A (closed-book) 
 
Calculator:  
Casio FX-991MS or Sharp EL-520X           
 
 
Missed quizzes or laboratories.  If you miss a test or a laboratory session, consideration will 
be given as follows, provided your petition (submitted online) is approved.  
 
If you missed any of the first 4 labs and your petition is approved, then you are provided 
with a makeup lab.  
 
If you miss lab #5 then your average lab mark will be calculated based on the previous 4 
labs. 
 
If you miss a quiz and your petition is approved, your average quiz mark will be 
calculated based on the other quizzes. 
 
If you missed any lab or test without a petition, or your petition is not approved, a zero 
mark will be recorded for that component.

