## Page 1

University of Toronto
Faculty Of Applied Science Engineering
Department Of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI IOS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test I — February 13, 2018, 1:00 — 2:30 p.m.
(e= 8S FJ'm, g. = Mm g Ny'kg)
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS, USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY _
Nun-programmable calculators Sharp
You are allowed a one page (83" x I I") double-sided aid sheet.
3. For frill marks, you show methods, state UNITS and compute nurnericalanswerswhen requested.
Write in PEN Otherwise. no remarking request will be accepted.
. There is one extra blank æe at the end for rough work.
Lasi N •me:
First Name:
Studen t Number:
Tutorial Section :
Full
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY)
C] 01
Cl 02
03
04
Ü 05
06
CJ 07
CJ 08
C] 09
D 10
C] 11
D 12
WB342
HA403
HA403
HA403
GB405
GB404
BA1240
SF3202
BA1200
LM162
SS2135
wB119
Wed. p.m.
Mon,
Thurs. 12-2 p.m.
Fri. 4-6 p.m.
Wed. 12-2 p.m.
Tues. 3-5 p.m.
Fri. p.m.
Fri. p.m.
Mon. 4-6 p.m.
Thurs. 1-3 p.rn.
Thurs. p.m.
Fri. 12-2 p.m.
Question
TOTAL
Mark



## Page 2

QI 110 marksl
Figure below shows an infinitely Jong thin uire uith uniforrn charge density [Clml placed horizontally
above the ground. A positive charge (with mass m) is suspended the charged wire (and ground) as
shown.
charge, charge
G round
a) What is the sign of the charges the wire (positive or negative)? Justify armser. (2 marks)
Pos
bj Find an expression for the line charge density as a function of Q, m, ard Otikr parameters? (3 marks)
1.0 EÅ



## Page 3

QI continued
c) Now. suppose at time t O, a Lmiform infinite sheet of positive charge "ith charge density C [C,'m21 is
positioned as shossnbelow, In "hich direction does the charge begin to Justify your answer.
(2 marks)
+0
Line
cowge
d) Find an expression for the magnitude of the velocity by which the charge +0 moves in terms of Q, m, t
and other parameters. (3 marks)
acceleration. a
velocity



## Page 4

Q2110 marks'
a) The capacitor C, = 8 uF was initially charged to a BMentiaI difference V, = 120 V through a poner supply
and then from the capacitor 4 Was initially What is the
potential difference across each capacitor and what is thc charge on each capacitor after the switch is closed
ror a long time (i.e. after charge no longer flows)? (4 marks)
Switch
120 v
80 V
QI =



## Page 5

Q2 continued
b) A 5 nF parallel-plate capacitor is charged to 120 V. It is then disconnected from thc battery and immersed
in distilled water. Distilled water is a good insulator a dielectric constmt K — 80.
i) What are the capacitance and voltage of the water-filled capacitor? (2 marks)
c
ii) What are the stored in the capacitor before and after its immersion? (2 marks)



## Page 6

Q2 continued
c) Three current-carrying wires are shoun Erlow and each wire has a current of (2 marks)
Variation Of radius:
Radius = a
Conductivity
case B
Square side length = a
case C
Length
Start"End
Radius =
C omhctivity
Circle either true (T) or false for Of the following Statement. (2 marks)
i) The largest current density is found in Case C.
ii) The resistance of Case A is larger than that of Case B.
8



## Page 7

Q3 110 marksl
a) Consider a beam of electrons moving with a constant velocity v. through a magnetic field, B, directed into
the page. as qtown below.
i) Which of the following diagrams correctly descritw the motion of thc electron beam. Circle the correct
'X
answer. ( I mark)
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
c
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
X
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x



## Page 8

03 continued
b) A loop Of radius R = / On, carries a Current, in direction as in
figure below, At a distance of 2 cm from the centre of the Ic»p there is a straight wire carning current i: — 2S
i) is the magnitude and diwction of the magnetic field at the centre of the loop? (3 marks)
ii) What valueand direction ofi2 would produce zero-magnetic field at the center ofthe circle? (2
marks)



## Page 9

Q3 co ntinued
e) Consider the tuo concentric conductors as below. The inner conductor has a radius of a = cm,
While conductor an inner b • 3 and outer radius Of c -l The inner
coruluctor carriers a current of = 40 m,' and the outer conductor carries same current in the Opm»site
direction.
i) What is the magnitude of the magnetic field at a radius ofr = 2 em (between the inner and outer
conductors)? (2 marks)
ii) What is thc value of B at a radius of r = S em? (2 marks)



## Page 10

*No text found*

