## Page 1

University of Toronto
Faculty Of Applied Science and Engineering
Department Of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI IOS - Electrical Fundamentals
Term 2 - 28.2017. 1:30 -s:oop.m.
(e- c.G-8AS
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS. USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY.
(Casio FX-991MS & Sharp EL•.S20Xj
2. full you must m ehOdS. State UNITS compute answers When requested.
3. Write in PEN. Otherwise. no remarking request will be accepted.
4. There is one extra blank page at the end for rough work.
Last
First Name:
Studen t N umber:
Tutorial
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY)
01
02
03
06
07
09
10
11
12
GB404
SF2202
WB342
WB342
GB404
GB304
WB341
sF2202
GB40S
BA1240
SF2202
BA1220
Mon. prn.
Mon 3-5 p.m.
12-2 p.m.
Fri. 4-6 p.m_
Thu. 12-2
Tue, 3-5 p,m,
Wed.
Tue, 10-12 p.m.
Tue 3-5 p.m.
Fri.
Wed. 4-6 p. m



## Page 2

QI 110 marks'
the in the fugue A. = I A. = 3 m, 2 m. and
height m.
(a) 12 Write function Of
the magnitude of mg.—etic fkld by the
Current II, NO is
(b) Calculate on and Of
W i re loop. taking cmly thc mgmtic field
by
(c) II mark' If the rectagular wire loop is and free to move; which direction Will it
Ill.
Positive
Negative
Positive y "direction
New ve
The will not move



## Page 3

(d) 14 Calculate the of mgnetic passing thc wire
In(x)
6



## Page 4

Q: 110
Consi&r the system that cmsists of circuits thai are
coupled thrægh a within the othcO. All el—ts of this lie flat with
respect to the paper
Outer Coil
(a) 13 marksl fißt circuit consists or a single circular kop in semes with the
Let •s Say Of a which initially far away papa. is moved
tlvough the miuctive Which Of the —t
• in magnetic field thc coil)
= right•tAeft
clockwise.
= , = left-IL—right
casc mgnet Shown in the diagram is that it a time
Amperes. time, coil • 10
This is elxtmrmgnetically coupkd 10 the inner wil (40
which æsults a peak thc resistor, R — 2
(b' 13 Calculate Ihe field in



## Page 5

12 Calculate thc the inner coil:
| 2 the current the resislor



## Page 6

following circuit
— 2kn
p Co.ule j. usiq NO



## Page 7

(b) in Ro
p 2'. 759m'v'
(c) 12 in sources


