## Page 1

University of Toronto
Faculty Of A"lied Science and Engineering
Of and Computer Engineering
ECE I I OS — Electrical Fundamentals
2019, 6:30 - 8:00 p.m.
(e c.eo - 8.85 Fm go Him, g - 9.81 N,'kg)
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS. USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY.
. Non-programmable calculators (Casio FX-991MS & Sharp EL•S20X) arc allowed.
You are allowed a one page (8.5" x I I") double-sided aid sheet.
2.
For full rnarks, you must show methods, state UNITS and compute numerical answers (when
Write in PEN. Otherwise, no remarking request will he accepted
4.
Iliere is one extra blank page at the end for rough work.
Last Name:
First Name:
Student N m
Tutorial Section
(YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SECTION CORRECTLY)
01
02
03
C] 04
06
C] 07
09
C] 10
KS 106
1m
SF3202
HA410
GB404
GB24S
SF3201
MY380
Wed. 4-6 p.m.
Qwstion
wed. 12-2 mm.
Wed 4—6 p. m.
Fri. 10-12 pm
Tues. 4-6 p, m.
Fri. 12-2 p.m.
4-6 p.m.
wed. 12-2 pm
Wd 4—5 p.m.
Wed. 4-6 p. m.



## Page 2

QI 110 marksl
Figure shows a metallic wire loop in the Shal* of M equilateral triangle (all sides are equal
having the length a centimeter) immersed in a magnetic ficid i. Ihe magnetic tield (j) is
uniform in pointing into the page. but Changes with time according to t e
Considering the time interval O < t < I second, answer the following qlæstk_sns.
a) Derive an expression for thc of the
induced in terms Of a and assuming each
side of the triangle a resistance R (n). What is @
the direction of thc induced current (ckxkwise or
counter clockwise)? (6 marks)



## Page 3

QI continued
b) Obtain an expression for total pouer dissipated in thc nvetallic loop. Show all your work
and simplify your "'swer as much as possible. (2 marks)
c) Suppose that cach side of the triangle is doubled in length, the loop is Still entirely
immersed in the magnetic field AS compared to the part does the induced Current increase or
decrease and by how much? Show all your work. (2 marks)



## Page 4

Q2 110 marks)
2.1 Consider the circuit shown Some element voltages and element currents are given.
Calculate the powers for clement A and element B? (J marks)
IA



## Page 5

2.2 For the circuit given below,
100 Q
10 v
a) Assume that you are solving this problem using nodal analysis technique, write a set of
equations in terms of nodal voltages. (2.5 marks)
b) Assume that you are solving this problem using mesh analysis technique, write a set of
equations in terms Of mesh currents. (2.5 marks)
c) Determine V. by solving the set Of equations in either a) or b) alywe. (2 marks)



## Page 6

03 110 marks'
Consider the circuit containing a current source and a voltage Shown
Ion
v. 200
a) What is the contribution Of the current alone to
The magtitude Of V. (2
The power dissipated in the resistor R, (2 marks)
RL = Ion



## Page 7

b) What is the Of voltage sotrce alone to:
The magnituck Of V. (2 m • rks).
diss in the resistor RI, (2 marks)



## Page 8

The of (l rk)
The in the resistor RL (l rk)



## Page 9

*No text found*


## Page 10

*No text found*

