## Page 1

Page 1 of 4 
 
 
University of Toronto 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
 
ECE110S – Electrical Fundamentals 
Midterm Test 1 – February 10, 2011, 6:00 – 7:30 p.m. 
 
 
ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS ON THESE SHEETS, USING THE BACK SIDE IF NECESSARY. 
1. Non-programmable calculators are allowed. 
2. For full marks, you must show methods, state UNITS and compute numerical answers when  requested. 
3. Write in PEN. Otherwise, no remarking request will be accepted. 
4. There is one extra blank page at the end for rough work. 
5.   One 8 1/2” x 11” aid sheet allowed 
_______________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Last Name:  ____________________________________________________ 
 
First Name:  ____________________________________________________ 
 
Student Number:  _______________________________________________ 
 
Tutorial Section 
 (YOU LOSE ONE MARK FOR NOT MARKING YOUR TUTORIAL SESSION CORRECTLY): 
 
 
 
01 WB342 
Mon. 3-5 p.m.  
Question 
Mark 
    
02 GB304 
Mon. 3-5 p.m.  
 
03 WB342 
Tue. 4-6 p.m. 
 
 
1 
 
 
04 GB304 
Tue. 4-6 p.m. 
 
 
05 GB404 
Wed. 4-6 p.m.  
2 
 
 
06 WB219 
Wed. 4-6 p.m.  
 
07 SF2202 
Wed. 2-4 p.m.  
3 
 
 
08 WB219 
Wed. 2-4 p.m.  
 
09 GB120 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
 
TOTAL 
           
       
 
10 WB130 
Fri. 4-6 p.m. 
 
 
11 SF2202 
Fri. 2-4 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
12 WB130 
Fri. 2-4 p.m.


## Page 2

Page 2 of 4 
 
 
1. [10 marks] A uniform infinitely long positive volume charge density  [C/m3] is distributed inside a 
cylinder of radius a. Answer the following questions: 
 
(a) What is the electric field (
) for 0<r<a. Identify both magnitude and direction. (3 marks) 
(b) What is the electric field (
) for a<r<∞. Identify both magnitude and direction. (3 marks) 
(c) A positive charge q has moved from point P1 to P2. As the result of this movement has the electrostatic 
potential (ΔV) increased or decreased and by how much? (Give an expression for ΔV) (4 marks) 
 
 
 
               
 
(a)   
  
                  radial outward 
 
(b)   
   
    
 
         radial outward 
 
(c)    
    
        
  
           voltage increased due to movement from P1 to P2


## Page 3

Page 3 of 4 
 
 
2. [10 marks] The figure below shows a parallel-plate capacitor with an area of 0.15m2. The capacitor is 
charged to a voltage of 120 Volts by a battery and then the battery is disconnected. A dielectric material of 
thickness 0.5cm with a dielectric constant of 3 is then inserted symmetrically between the plates as shown. 
Determine: 
(a) Capacitance before inserting the dielectric (2 marks)  
(b) Capacitance after inserting the dielectric (3 marks) 
(c) Electric potential difference across the plates after inserting the dielectric (2 marks) 
(d) Whether the dielectric is pulled in or must be pushed in and work required to insert the dielectric (3 
marks) 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 88.5 pF 
(b) 114 pF 
(c) 93.16 V 
(d) -142.5 nJ, pulled in


## Page 4

Page 4 of 4 
 
 
3. [10 marks] Consider the infinitely long conductor of radius R=10 mm, located along the y-axis. The 
1000 A current flows in a positive y direction and is uniformly distributed through its cross-section.  
(a) Where in the x-z plane is the magnetic field the greatest? Consider the area inside and outside the 
conductor. What is the maximum value of the magnetic field? (3 marks) 
(b) What is the minimum value of the magnetic field inside the conductor and where does this occur.  
      (1 marks) 
(c) Calculate the magnitude and the direction of the magnetic field at point A (40m, 10m, 30m).  (3 marks) 
(d) Assume that 10nC charge is located at A and is moving with velocity v = 1m/s in the positive y direction.  
Calculate the force vector on the charged particle. (3 marks) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
y
x
z
I
R = 10mm
(a) Maximum at r=R, Bmax=20mT 
(b) Bmin=0 at r=0  
(c) BA=4 microTesla perpendicular to the radius 
(d) F=4x10-14
 N radial inward (toward the conductor)

