## Page 1

• 132 page 1 10
ECE 110 TERM TEST 1
2024-02-08
write legibly as within
First
Last nare
Student



## Page 2

gsYF
page 2
University of Toronto
Faculty Of Applied Science and Engineering
Department Of Electrical and Computer Engineering
ECEI OS — Electrical Fundamentals
Term Test 1 - February 08, 2024
pn. (1.5 hours)
Instructions :
Exam Type a one-page (SS" x I I") double-sided aid sheet is allowed. This aid
shcct may be handwritten or computer-generated. including typCMitten text,
images, Or other formats that fit within the Using the template from F ASEs
website is mandatory.
Non•programmable calculators (Casio FX•991MS & Sharp El—520X) are
_ Please use a dark pcn or pencil and ensure your hand"Titing is clear, as the paßr
will be scanned for grading.
For full marks. you must Slate UNITS, and compute
answeß when requested.
An extra blank page is provided at the end. Ifyou use this page for your answers,
make Sure to clearly indicate this within the relevant question to ensure it is
considered during the grading process.
6. TAs and instructors CANNOT answer inquiries regarding the exam questions, If
you are unsure the question, please Stalc your assumptions in your answer.



## Page 3

• 732 page 3 ot 10
QI. capacitor acquires a Charge Of Q' When connected to a battery Of voltage vo as
Shown in the figure When the switch is in position I _ switch is moved to
2 connecting c I to the initially uncharged capacitors C: and C3.
a) Derive an expression for the voltage across C; in terms OfQo, Cl, C: and C'. 14 marksl
Qoca



## Page 4

.732 4 of 10
QI continued.
b) IfC: is a cylindrical capacitor with a length of em, inner and outer conductor radii
of I mm and 5 mm, respectively. Compute Cl. II marki
C, = 1942pF
c) If C: is a parallel plate capacitor With plate area Of 2 cm2 and plate Of I mm,
and is a parallel plate capacitor similar to C: except it has a dielectric with dielectric
constant of 3 between the plates. Compute C2 and C'. 12 marksl
d) If the battery voltage Vo is 5 volts Compute the energy stored in C: and the voltage
13 marks'



## Page 5

*732 5
Q2. Consider a stationary ncm-comlueting spherical shell, with a radius of I m that has a
negative Charge uniformly distributed its surface. AS in thc figure, a negatively
charged particle with charge q, —5 X 10-8 C and a mass of 5 x 10-Skg is
by a thin insulating thread that is I m in length, angle O thc thread
and the vertical axis is 300, The Origin of the coordinate system is set at the center ofthc
spherical Shell, An infinitely large uniformly sheel is positioned
3 m away from thc origin (x = 3 m) in parallel with the y-zplane (shoun in cross•seetion
in the figure below). Assume gravitational acceleration is 9.Bm/s2_ The z-axis is
perpendicular to thc page with the positive direction coming out of the
a) What is the surface charge density of the sheet ? 16 marksl



## Page 6

page 6 of LO
b) Now consider adding a uniformly charged, non-conducting, infinitely-long line placed
along the z-axis, centered at the coordinates (10.00). If qu is located at the origin of the
System What is the line Charge density A? 14 marksl



## Page 7

• 732 page
oe 10
Q3. Figure show a non-conducting uniformly charged shell of radius R2 = 2 cm with
charge density a = —L _ A uniformly charged solid sphere has charge density p =
I is inside the Shell and is With it. A
positive point charge q =
I nC is located at L = 10 Cm. All of the above charges are fixed
in position.
o
a) We Wish to place a charge outside Of the Shell such that is at equilibrium.
Calculate thc location at which qo must be placed. Show all your work and justify your
17



## Page 8

Rage a
Q3 continued.
b) With qo in place, and assuming qo = I nC. what is total electrostatic potential (voltage)
at the location P. where P is 2 to the right ofthe charge q. 13 marksl



## Page 9

8732 page 9 20
This lüge is intentionally left blank. You may use this sheet for rough work.



## Page 10

6.
*732


