## Page 1

CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 1 of 15 
 
 
 
University of Toronto 
 
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering 
    
    
Midterm – October, 2018 
 
 CSC444 --- Software Engineering I 
 
 
Examiner: Michael Stumm  
 
 
Instructions: Please read carefully. 
• Write you last name, first name, and student number in the fields below 
• Write your name and student number at the top of every page of this exam. 
• This exam has fifteen (15) pages. 
• All questions must be answered on these sheets.  
• No additional sheets are permitted. 
• Do not remove any sheets from this exam. 
• There are a total of 6 questions. 
• If any of the questions appear unclear or ambiguous to you, then make any 
assumptions you need, state them and answer the question that way. If you 
believe there is an error, state what the error is, fix it, and respond as if fixed. 
• Please write clearly so we can read what you write, and please use proper English 
so we can understand what you write. 
• The use of calculators or computers is not permitted.  
• Length of exam: 90 minutes 
• Please manage time carefully; consider answering the easy questions first. 
 
Last Name: ________________________________________ 
First Name: ________________________________________ 
Student Number: ___________________________________ 
 
Do not write below this line: 
 
 
1 
 
2  
3 
4 
5 
6a 
6b 
6c 
6d 
6e 
6f 
 
Total:


## Page 2

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 2 of 15 
1. Simple warmup questions                                                                           (10 marks) 
 
a. What is your UofT email address? 
   
 
   
b. Identify what project group you belong to either by providing the name of the 
project or by identifying the other group members. If you do not belong to any 
group yet, write "NONE". 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
   
c. What is a gem? 
 
 
 
 
 
d. What Git command would you use to add your code changes to the central 
repository? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e. Why would you not want to commit binaries, such as.o files, into a GIT 
repository?


## Page 3

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 3 of 15 
 
2. Acronyms 
       (12  marks) 
 
This course introduced a lot of acronyms. For each acronym below, state what it 
stand for and indicate the context in which they are used. Write the answer to the 
right of the acronym.  
 
For example, for the acronym HTML, the correct answer would be 
 
           Hypertext Markup Language --- for formatting Web pages 
 
 
a. CSS 
 
 
 
 
b. DRY 
 
 
 
 
c. SOLID 
 
 
 
 
d. BDD 
 
 
 
 
e. REST 
 
 
 
 
f. CRUD


## Page 4

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 4 of 15 
3. Waterfall model 
       (10  marks) 
a. List five of the phases in the Waterfall model: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b. In what ways does the Waterfall model differs from Behavior-Driven 
Development.


## Page 5

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 5 of 15 
4. Rails naming conventions 
       (10 marks) 
Rails does a lot of stuff for you so that you don't have to do it. However, this requires 
that you follow certain conventions as per "Convention over Configuration".  Using 
the terminology of (snake_case/CamelCase and single/plural) what naming 
convention is to be used for: 
 
a. route resource names 
 
 
   
b. database tables 
 
 
   
c. database attribute (i.e., column) names 
 
 
   
d. files for models 
 
 
  
e. model classes 
 
 
   
f. files for controllers 
 
 
   
g. controller classes 
 
 
   
h. controller methods 
 
 
   
i. files for views  
 
 
 
j. Ruby symbols


## Page 6

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 6 of 15 
5. Routing 
       (10 marks) 
The following code generates routes so that incoming HTTP requests are routed to 
specific actions belonging to specific controllers: 
 
      Rails.application.routes draw do 
          root    'welcome/index' 
          resources    :toys, ,  except:  [:destroy] 
          get 'profile',  action: :show,   controller: 'users' 
      end 
 
 
List the controller actions that would need to be implemented and for each action  
give the URI that might cause the action to be invoked in the table below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Controller 
Action 
URI


## Page 7

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 7 of 15 
6. Ruby on Rails 
                                                                                      (48 marks) 
Joey was taking a software engineering class and had to do an assignment. To reduce 
his workload, he went on the Web and found some code that he thought would satisfy 
the assignment. However, after staring at the code a bit, he noticed some things were 
missing. (You always have to be careful with code you get from the Internet: it may 
or it may not be correct, and it may or it may not be of good quality.) 
 
Please read through the code on the following pages to get an understanding of what 
this app does. Each line has been numbered so that you can refer to them in your 
answers to the questions that follow. 
 
You will notice that the routing code declares "nested routes". This is something that 
was not taught in class. Nested routes are sometimes used when one resource is 
logically a child of another resource. For example, suppose an application includes 
the following models: 
 
    class Magazine < ApplicationRecord 
        has_many :ads 
    end 
    class Ad < ApplicationRecord 
        belongs_to :magazine 
    end 
 
Nested routes allow you to capture this relationship in your routing, for example by 
using the following route declaration: 
 
    resources :magaines do 
        resources :ads 
    end 
 
In addition to creating the routes for magazines, this declaration will also route ads to 
an AdsController, but the ad URLs require a magazine; e.g., 
 
   GET   /magazines/:magazine_id/ads  is routed to ads#index to display all ads of a magazine 
   GET /magazines/:magazine_id/ads/new is routed to ads#new 
   GET /magazines/:magazine_id/ads/:id is routed to ads#show 
   … 
 
The above routing declaration will also create routing helpers such as magazine_ads_url 
and edit_magazine_ad_path. These helpers take an instance of Magazine as their first 
parameter; e.g., magazine_ads_url(@magazine).


## Page 8

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 8 of 15 
  1 class TodoListsController < ApplicationController 
  2     before_action :set_todo_list, only: [:show, :edit, :update, :destroy] 
  3  
  4     def index 
  5         @todo_lists = TodoList.all 
  6     end 
  7  
  8     def show 
  9     end 
 10  
 11     def new 
 12         @todo_list = TodoList.new 
 13     end 
 14  
 15     def edit 
 16     end 
 17  
 18     def create 
 19         @todo_list = TodoList.new(todo_list_params) 
 20  
 21         if @todo_list.save 
 22             redirect_to @todo_list, notice: 'Todo list was successfully created.'  
 23         else 
 24             render :new  
 25         end 
 26     end 
 27  
 28     def update 
 29         if @todo_list.update(todo_list_params) 
 30             redirect_to @todo_list, notice: 'Todo list was successfully updated.'  
 31         else 
 32             render :edit  
 33         end 
 34     end 
 35  
 36     def destroy 
 37         @todo_list.destroy 
 38         redirect_to root_url, notice: 'Todo list was successfully destroyed.' } 
 39     end 
 40  
 41   private 
 42     # Use callbacks to share common setup or constraints between actions. 
 43     def set_todo_list 
 44         @todo_list = TodoList.find(params[:id]) 
 45     end 
 46  
 47     # Never trust parameters from the scary internet, only allow the white list through. 
 48     def todo_list_params 
 49         params.require(:todo_list).permit(:title, :description) 
 50     end 
 51 end 
 52  
 53


## Page 9

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 9 of 15 
 54 class TodoItemsController < ApplicationController 
 55     before_action :set_todo_list 
 56     before_action :set_todo_item, except: [:create] 
 57  
 58     def create 
 59         @todo_item = @todo_list.todo_items.create(todo_item_params) 
 60         redirect_to @todo_list 
 61     end 
 62  
 63     def destroy 
 64         if @todo_item.destroy 
 65             flash[:success] = "Todo List item was deleted" 
 66         else 
 67             flash[:error] = "Todo List item could not be deleted." 
 68         end 
 69         redirect_to @todo_list 
 70     end 
 71  
 72     def complete 
 73         @todo_item.update_attribute(:completed_at, Time.now) 
 74         redirect_to @todo_list, notice: "Todo item completed" 
 75     end 
 76  
 77   private 
 78  
 79     def set_todo_list 
 80         @todo_list = TodoList.find(params[:todo_list_id]) 
 81     end 
 82  
 83     def set_todo_item 
 84         @todo_item = @todo_list.todo_items.find(params[:id]) 
 85     end 
 86  
 87     def todo_item_params 
 88         params[:todo_item].permit(:content) 
 89     end 
 90 end 
 91  
 92 class CreateTodoLists < ActiveRecord::Migration 
 93     def change 
 94         create_table :todo_lists do |t| 
 95             t.string :title 
 96             t.text :description 
 97  
 98             t.timestamps 
 99         end 
100     end 
101 end 
102


## Page 10

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 10 of 15 
103 class CreateTodoItems < ActiveRecord::Migration 
104     def change 
105         create_table :todo_items do |t| 
106             t.string :content 
107             t.references :todo_list, foreign_key: true 
108  
109             t.timestamps 
110         end 
111     end 
112 end 
113  
114 class CompletedAtToTodoItems < ActiveRecord::Migration 
115     def change 
116         add_column :todo_items, :completed_at, :datetime 
 
117     end 
118 end 
119  
120  
121 class TodoItem < ApplicationRecord 
122     belongs_to :todo_list 
123  
124     def completed? 
125         !completed_at.blank? 
126     end 
127 end 
128  
129 class TodoList < ApplicationRecord 
130     has_many :todo_items 
131 end 
 
Now to the questions: 
a. At a high level, and in just a few words, what does this application implement? 
 
 
 
 
b. Draw the database tables this app creates and show the direct relationships between 
the tables below, by drawing a  « line if they are in a 1:1 relationship, a ® line 
going from n to the 1if they are in a 1:n relationship, and a line with no arrow heads 
(¾) if they are in an n:m relationship.  Do not show indirect relationships.


## Page 11

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 11 of 15 
c. Identify in what files each line of code belongs. For example, if lines 1- 51 belong in 
a file X, write 1-51: X. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d. You will notice that views are missing. Identify the views that need to be 
implemented by this app by giving their filenames


## Page 12

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 12 of 15 
e. Provide the code you would put in app/views/todo_lists/index.html.erb. The syntax 
and grammar of your code does not need to be perfect as long as we can 
understandable what your code intends to do.


## Page 13

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 13 of 15 
f. One problem with the given code is that it allows everyone access to your ToDo lists. 
In the space below and on the following pages, provide the code that would need to 
be added to ensure that only you can access your ToDo lists and items. Please 
identify where each code segment you write should go by identifying the line 
number after which the code segment should be inserted. The syntax and grammar of 
your code does not need to be perfect as long as we can understandable what your 
code intends to do. Moreover, you can assume the availability of a helper functions 
for encrypting passwords and authenticating a password.


## Page 14

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 14 of 15


## Page 15

Name: ____________________________________ Student Number________________ 
 
CSC444 
Midterm 2018 
Page 15 of 15

