## Page 1

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 1 of 7 
 
 
   
ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals 
Fall 2022 
 
 
General Information Handout 
 
Welcome to ECE244! This handout provides high-level information about the course, including 
its organization, components, reference material, assessment and topics covered. Please read it 
and keep it for reference during the term. 
 
 
Calendar Description 
 
Provides a foundation in programming using an object-oriented programming language. Topics 
include classes and objects, inheritance, exception handling, basic data structures (lists, tree, etc.), 
Big-O complexity analysis, and testing and debugging. The laboratory assignments emphasize 
the use of object-oriented programming constructs in the design and implementation of 
reasonably large programs. 
 
 
Instructors 
 
Ding Yuan 
ECE Department  
Office: 2002E Sanford Fleming Building 
Phone: (416) 978-5033 
E-mail: yuan@eecg.toronto.edu 
URL: https://www.eecg.utoronto.ca/~yuan/ 
 
 
SK MD Mizanur Rahman 
ECE Department  
Subhendu Bhadra 
ECE Department 
E-mail: subhendu.bhadra@utoronto.ca 
 
E-mail: sk.rahman@utoronto.ca 
URL: https://ca.linkedin.com/in/mizanmizan  
 
 
 
 
Learning Outcomes 
 
At the conclusion of this course, you will be able to: 
1. Write C++ code that utilizes encapsulation and code reuse features of the C++ 
programming language. 
2. Understand basic data structures, such as arrays, linked lists and trees, and write C++ 
code to implement and manipulate them. 
3. Express the run-time complexity of simple algorithmic segments using big-O notation. 
4. Utilize modern programing tools, such as compilers, debuggers and IDEs. 
 
 
Industrial Relevance


## Page 2

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 2 of 7 
 
 
   
 
Object-oriented programming is the most wide-spread programming paradigm today. Every 
application that runs on a mobile device (phone or tablet) and much of the code that runs on 
desktops and servers is written using an object-oriented language, such as C++, Java or C#. A 
firm grasp of this paradigm is key to modern software development. 
 
 
Course Web Site 
 
Information on ECE 244, including important announcements, a copy of this handout, copies of 
assignment handouts, and course marks may be found on the web site for the course. Please visit 
the web site on a regular basis for up-to-date information.  
 
The course website is at: https://www.eecg.utoronto.ca/~yuan/teaching/ece244/ 
 
We use Piazza for online Q/A – instructors and TAs will be monitoring the discussion forum 
and answer your questions. The URL: https://piazza.com/utoronto.ca/fall2022/ece244 
 
 
E-mail 
 
All UofT students are required to have a valid UTORmail email address. Please ensure that your 
UofT email address is properly entered in the ROSI system. 
 
Forwarding your utoronto.ca email to a Hotmail, Gmail, Yahoo or other type of email account is 
not advisable. In some cases, messages from utoronto.ca addresses sent to Hotmail, Gmail or 
Yahoo accounts are filtered as junk mail, which means that emails from your course instructor 
may end up in your spam or junk mail folder. 
 
 
 
Textbook and Other Reference 
 
The following book is recommended, and it will serve as the main reference for the course:  
 
Walter Savitch, Problem Solving with C++, 10th Edition, Pearson.  
 
The book is available in as an e-Text (ISBN: 9780134522418) or in hardcopy. A copy of the e-
Text can be obtained from the UofT Bookstore using the following link: 
 
https://www.campusebookstore.com/AccessCodes/AccessCodeBrowse.aspx?CODEID=25022 
 
Alternatively, the e-Text can be obtained directly from the publisher by following the steps 
below: 
 
1. Go to https://uoftbookstore.vitalsource.com/products/problem-solving-with-c-pod-file-
walter-savitch-v9780134521176  
2. Choose e-Text option (180-day or Lifetime) 
3. Click “Add to Cart” 
4. Click “Check out” 
5. “Sign up” (or sign in if you previously signed up) 
6. Proceed with checkout process


## Page 3

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 3 of 7 
 
 
   
 
You may also use a hardcopy of the book, either new or used. In the latter case, it is not necessary 
to buy the latest edition; any edition past the 7th edition (i.e., 8th or the 9th) is adequate for the 
purposes of the course. 
 
In addition to the textbook, you may consult with a wealth of reference material and excellent 
tutorials on the C++ programming language on the Web. Here are two examples: 
 
 
• C plus plus: http://www.cplusplus.com 
 
• Sharam Hekmat (pragsoft.com) C++ Programming: 
http://www.pragsoft.com/books/CppEssentials.pdf    
 
 
Lectures 
 
Lectures introduce and cover new concepts related to the topics of the course. It is highly 
recommended that you attend the lectures. Attending gives you a chance to interact with your 
instructor, pose questions in real time, as well as participate in answering questions and 
discussions. 
 
 
Tutorials 
 
The tutorials are intended to review basic programming concepts and revisit material already 
covered in the lectures in a more interactive setting, where questions can be asked frequently and 
freely. In contrast to the lectures, no new material will be introduced, and often only basic 
material will be reviewed. As such, attending the tutorials is optional. 
 
 
Laboratory Assignments 
 
The lab assignments consist of several programming exercises using the C++ programming 
language. Please refer to the “Laboratory Information Handout” for a list of the assignments, 
their schedule, due dates as well as general information about the labs.  
 
The lab assignments do take a substantial amount of your time. Hence, it is important to start as 
early as possible on your assignments and to avoid procrastination. Lab assignments are always 
due at 5:00pm on their due date (also shown in the Topics Outline section below). You are to do 
each assignment by yourself, i.e., individually. Sharing code or submitting code that is written 
by someone else will be checked for, will not be tolerated, and will be treated as an academic 
offence. 
 
 
Timetable 
 
The following is the timetable for the course’s lectures and tutorials. There are three lectures, one 
tutorial, and one lab session per week. Please double check your timetable for the locations 
since they may change when the term starts.


## Page 4

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 4 of 7 
 
 
   
Section 
Weekday 
Hours 
Location 
 
 
 
 
Lecture LEC0101 
(Prof. Bhadra) 
Tuesday 
9am-10am 
LM162 
Thursday 
9am-10am 
LM162 
Friday 
9am-10am 
LM162 
Lecture LEC0102 
(Prof. Rahman) 
Monday 
3pm-4pm 
MB128 
Wednesday 
3pm-4pm 
MB128 
Thursday 
3pm-4pm 
WB116 
Lecture LEC0103 
(Prof. Yuan) 
Monday 
3pm-4pm 
MC252 
Wednesday 
3pm-4pm 
MC252 
Thursday 
3pm-4pm 
MC252 
 
 
 
 
Tutorial TUT0101/0102 
Wednesday 
11am-12noon 
*MC252* 
Tutorial TUT0103/0104 
Friday 
3-4pm 
*GB248* 
Tutorial TUT0105/0106 
Friday 
9-10am 
*GB119* 
 
 
Assessment and Evaluation 
 
Assessment is done through a midterm test, programming assignments and a final examination. 
The date and time of the midterm will be announced shortly after the term starts. The final 
examination is given during the final exams’ period at the end of the term. The exact method of 
delivery of the midterm test and the final exam will be announced in the lectures. 
 
The composition of the final mark is as follows:  
 
 
 
 
Topic Outline 
 
The following table is a weekly list of the topics covered in the course, and the corresponding 
reference in the textbook. Chapters are from the 10th edition of the “Problem Solving with C++” 
textbook; earlier editions may have slightly different chapter numbers, but essentially the same 
content. The table also shows labs for each week, along with each lab’s due date. 
 
The topics and their scheduled dates are based on the timetable of one of the lecture sections 
(LEC0103). Please keep in mind that this list of topics and their scheduled dates is tentative and 
is intended to serve as only a guide. Varying pace of material delivery may require changes to 
this list of topics and/or the schedule.  
 
Midterm Test 
 
35% 
 
Programming Assignments 
 
 
25% 
Assignment 1 
2% 
   
Assignment 2 
6% 
 
Assignment 3 
7% 
 
Assignment 4 
7% 
 
Assignment 5 
3% 
 
 
Final Examination 
 
 
40% 
Week 
Dates 
Lecture 
Topics 
Reference* 
Labs 
[Due 
Date**] 
0 
9/8 
L1 
Course organization 
Handouts 
None


## Page 5

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 5 of 7 
 
 
   
*Chapters in the textbook. 
**Labs are due at 5:00pm on their due date. 
 
 
Term-Work Petitions 
 
During the course you may encounter circumstances beyond your control, such as illness or a 
personal/family crisis. These circumstances may force you to miss course work, such as 
assignments or the midterm test. In such cases, you may submit a term-work petition through the 
1 
9/12 
L2 
Introduction to C++: I/O, strings 
1-5 
Lab 1 
9/14 
L3 
C++ functions and parameter passing. 
Program organization 
5, 12.1 
9/15 
L4 
Separate compilation 
(Online demo) 
12.1 
2 
9/19 
L5 
Introduction to classes 
10 
Lab 1 
[9/23] 
9/21 
L6 
Access control in C++ classes 
10 
9/22 
L7 
C++ constructors/destructor 
10 
3 
9/26 
L8 
Organizing/Compiling programs with 
classes 
12.1 
Lab 2 
9/28 
L9 
Online demo for classes 
Code 
9/29 
L11 
C++ I/O 
6 
4 
10/3 
L11 
C++ I/O 
6 
Lab 2 
[10/7] 
10/5 
L12 
C++ I/O (online demo) 
Code 
10/6 
L13 
Pointers 
9 
5 
10/10 
L14 
Thanksgiving, no class 
 
Lab 3 
10/12 
L15 
Pointers and arrays 
7, 9 
10/13 
L16 
Pointers and arrays 
9, 11.3, 11.4 
6 
10/17 
L17 
Operator overloading 
11.2 
Lab 3 
10/19 
L18 
The Complex class example (Online demo) 
11.2, Code 
10/20 
L19 
Objects with pointers 
11.4 
7 
10/24 
L20 
Objects with pointers 
11.4 
Lab 3 
[10/28] 
10/26 
L21 
The String class example 
Lecture notes 
10/27 
L22 
Linked lists 
13.1 
8 
10/31 
L23 
Linked lists 
13.1 
Lab 4 
11/2 
L24 
Recursion 
14 
11/3 
L24 
Recursion 
14 
 
11/7 
Engineering Fall Study Break – No lectures, No Labs, No Tutorials 
11/9 
11/10 
9 
11/14 
L26 
Binary trees 
Lecture notes 
Lab 4 
11/16 
L27 
Binary trees 
Lecture notes 
11/17 
L28 
Binary trees 
Lecture notes 
10 
11/21 
L29 
Inheritance 
15  
Lab 4 
[11/25] 
11/23 
L31 
Inheritance 
15 
11/24 
L32 
Inheritance (Online demo) 
15, Code 
11 
11/28 
L33 
Inheritance (Online demo) 
15 
Lab 5 
11/30 
L33 
Inheritance (Online demo) 
15, Code 
12/1 
L34 
Complexity analysis 
18.3 
12 
12/5 
L35 
Complexity analysis 
18.3 
Lab 5 
[12/7] 
12/7 
L36 
Complexity analysis 
18.3


## Page 6

ECE 244 
Programming Fundamentals: Course Information 
Page 6 of 7 
 
 
   
Engineering portal (please see https://undergrad.engineering.utoronto.ca/petitions/about-
petitions/ for more details on petitions and for access to the portal). Once your petition is 
approved by the Academic Advisor, accommodations for the missed work will be provided. The 
type of accommodation varies based on the type of missed work. 
 
If you miss the midterm test, the accommodation is to transfer the weight of the midterm to the 
final exam. If you miss a lab assignment, the weight of the assignment is evenly transferred to 
the other lab assignments that you have completed. To receive such accommodation, you must 
have completed lab assignments with a combined weight of at least 15% (out of the 25% allocated 
to the lab assignments; please see above for the weights of the assignments). If this is not the 
case, the weight of the missed assignments is transferred to the final exam. 
 
As always, if you have questions or concerns regarding this policy, please contact the course 
coordinator. 
 
Land Acknowledgement 
 
I (we) wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto operates. For thousands 
of years it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and most recently, the 
Mississaugas of the Credit River. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous 
people from across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land. 
 
 
Mental Health 
 
It is not unusual that you experience a range of health and/or mental health challenges that could 
result in significant barriers to achieving your personal and academic goals. This is particularly 
the case this year, as we transition back to in-person teaching after the shutdown of the COVID-
19 pandemic.  
 
The University of Toronto and the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering offer a wide range 
of free and confidential services that could assist you during these times.  There are resources 
that you may find helpful are listed on the U of T Engineering Mental Health & Wellness 
webpage. This is a small selection of these resources:  
 
• Accessibility Services & the On-Location Advisor 
• Health & Wellness and the On-Location Health & Wellness Engineering Counsellor 
• Inclusion & Transition Advisor  
• U of T Engineering Learning Strategist and Academic Success 
• SKULE Mental Wellness 
• Scholarships & Financial Aid Office & Advisor  
 
If you find yourself feeling distressed and in need of more immediate support resources, consider 
reaching out to the counsellors at My Student Support Program (MySSP) or visiting the Feeling 
Distressed webpage.

