## Page 1

ECE361H1S Computer Networks I
This is a kernel course in Area 5.
 
Course description in the calendar 
Layered network architectures; overview of TCP/IP protocol suite. Introduction to sockets; 
introduction to application layer protocols. Peer-to-Peer Protocols: ARQ; TCP reliable 
stream service; flow control. Data Link Controls: Framing; PPP; HDLC. Medium access 
control and LANs: Aloha; Ethernet; Wireless LANs; Bridges. Packet Switching: Datagram 
and virtual circuit switching; Shortest path algorithms; Distance vector and link 
state algorithms.
Prerequisite: STA286H1 or ECE302H1  
Co-requisite: ECE302H1. (Students must take the co-requisite, ECE302H1 in the same 
semester as ECE361H, OR in a semester prior to taking ECE361H1.)
Instructor
▪
Professor Valaee
o
Office: BA4124
o
Email: Valaee@ece.utoronto.ca
Teaching Assistants
▪
Alireza Keshevarzian (Head TA)   <alireza.keshavarzian@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Hossein Bijanrostami  <hossein.bijanrostami@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Adnan Hamida <adnan.hamida@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Hooman Keshvari <hooman.keshvari@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Ali Parchekani  <ali.parchekani@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Amir Hossein Rostami <amirhosein.rostami@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Mohammadreza Sabramooz <mohammadreza.sabramooz@mail.utoronto.ca>


## Page 2

▪
Alireza Shateri <alireza.shateri@mail.utoronto.ca>
▪
Yuqiu Zhang  <quincy.zhang@mail.utoronto.ca>

Lectures
LEC01 
▪
Monday,                         11:00-12:00,     MC252
▪
Thursday, 
 
15:00-17:00,     MB128
LEC02
▪
Monday,  
 
16:00-17:00,      BA1190
▪
Thursday, 
 
09:00-11:00,      MC254
Tutorials
▪
TUT01: Tuesday 
18:00-19:00,   BA1190  (starting January 14)   
▪
TUT02: Tuesday  
19:00-20:00,  GB303     (starting January 14)
▪
TUT03: Monday  
  9:00-10:00,  BA1210  (starting January 13)
Labs
•
PRA01:  
Tuesday       15:00 - 18:00   	 GB243
•
PRA02:  
Tuesday       15:00 - 18:00   	 GB243
•
PRA03:  
Thursday     12:00 - 15:00   	 GB243
•
PRA04:  
Thursday     12:00 - 15:00   	 GB243
•
PRA05:           Wednesday  12:00 - 15:00   	 GB243
Office Hours
▪
Thursday,  
11:15-12:00  in  BA4124 
Textbook
▪Kurose and Ross, "Computer Networking: A Top Down Approach",     8th 
Ed., Pearson, 2023.
Complementary Reading List:
▪
Leon-Garcia and Widjaja, "Communications Networks", McGraw Hill, 2nd Ed., 2004. 
▪
Tanenbaum, "Computer Networks", Prentice Hall 2004.
▪
Peterson and Davie, "Computer Networks", Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.


## Page 3

Programming Labs
▪
Students will form groups of two (from the same practical session). There are no labs 
during the first week of classes; the schedule can be found on Quercus. 
▪
All programming labs will use the C programming language.   
▪
Both members of the team should be familiar with the details of the program and be 
able to answer TA’s questions. Team members might receive different marks.  

Wireshark Labs
▪
Students will form groups of two (the same group as the Programming Labs). Each 
group will submit only one report. The mark of the report will be given to both 
group members. Students will submit five (5) reports throughout the semester. 
Submission deadlines will be posted. The submission will be on Quercus. 

Tutorials and Quizzes 
In each tutorial session, the TA will solve some sample exam problems related to the 
material covered in that tutorial.  We have planned 12 tutorial sessions. There will be no 
tutorials in the week of January 06 to January 10. Tutorials are the place to ask 
questions related to the material covered in the previous week. 
There will be a total of 10 quizzes related to the material covered in the tutorials in the 
same week. Students are allowed to skip 2 quizzes (due to illness, other exams, or any 
other reasons such as just taking a break; no further accommodation is granted for 
missing quizzes and petitions are not accepted for the two missing quizzes). There is no 
need to inform the teaching team which one of the quizzes you will skip. Only 8 quizzes 
(with the top marks if more than 8 quizzes are written) will be used to calculate the 
total quiz mark. Please refer to the course coverage and the detailed list of tutorials for 
more information. 

Evaluation
▪
Final Exam (45%)
▪
Midterm (25%)
▪
Tutorial Quizzes (10%)
▪
Wireshark Labs (5%)
▪
Programming Labs (15%)

