## Page 1

2024 Fall Syllabus
ECE344: Operating Systems
Jonathan Eyolfson, Tome Kosteski
Outcome.
The high-level goal of this course is for students to understand the design and implementation
of operating systems software.
Topics.
Operating system structure, processes, threads, synchronization, CPU scheduling, memory man-
agement, file systems, input/output, multiple processor systems, virtualization, protection, and security.
The laboratory exercises will require implementation of part of an operating system.
Schedule.
All
dates
are
subject
to
change
from
the
University.
Lectures
start
September
3
and
end
December 4.
The final exam period is December 6 to December 23.
There is no lectures on October 14
(Thanksgiving Day). The fall study break is October 28 to November 1.
Section
Time
Location
LEC0101
Monday 1 PM to 2 PM
Room BA 1170
Tuesday 1 PM to 2 PM
Room BA 1170
Thursday 1 PM to 2 PM
Room BA 1170
LEC0102
Tuesday 3 PM to 4 PM
Room BA 1190
Wednesday 3 PM to 4 PM
Room BA 1190
Friday 3 PM to 4 PM
Room BA 1190
LEC0103
Tuesday 5 PM to 6 PM
Room BA 1180
Wednesday 5 PM to 6 PM
Room BA 1180
Friday 5 PM to 6 PM
Room BA 1180
PRA0101
Wednesday 3 PM to 6 PM
Room GB 243
Room GB 251
PRA0102
Tuesday 12 PM to 3 PM
Room GB 243
Room GB 251
PRA0103
Tuesday 9 AM to 12 PM
Room GB 243
Room GB 251
PRA0104
Thursday 12 PM to 3 PM
Room GB 243
Room GB 251
Discussion.
We will primarily use Discord for real-time questions and answers.
Materials.
All links to materials are provided on Quercus.
The book “Operating Systems:
Three Easy
Pieces” will complement the lectures.
1


## Page 2

Evaluation.
This course contains 6 labs, a midterm and final exam.
All dates are tentative.
The weights
and due dates are below.
Assessment
Weight
Due Date
Lab 0
1%
September 9
Lab 1
4%
September 16
Lab 2
4%
September 30
Lab 3
4%
October 15
Midterm Exam
25%
October 21 @ 7:30 PM
Lab 4
6%
November 13
Lab 5
2%
November 20
Lab 6
4%
December 4
Final Exam
50%
TBD
Students must submit at least 4 of 6 labs to complete the course.
Labs.
Submissions are done using the Git server.
We will provide students with a Git repository,
and
students are required to push their code for submission.
Students submission time is considered when
they push their code to the server, not their local timestamps. We do not accept late submissions.
Final Exam.
Our final exam will be “Type A” and “Type 3” as described by the Undergraduate Exam Types
and Permitted Calculators.
Type A.
A
“closed
book”
examination.
No
aids
are
permitted
other
than
the
information
printed on the examination paper.
Type 3.
Non-programmable calculators from a list of approved calculators as issued by the
Faculty Registrar. See a list of approved calculators below.
•
Casio FX-991 (EX recommended; any suffix is acceptable, including ES, PLUS, ES PLUSC, MS, MSPLUS2)
•
Sharp EL-520 (any suffix is acceptable, including X, XT)
•
Sharp EL-W516 (any suffix is acceptable, including TBSL, XG, XGB-SL)
•
Texas Instruments TI-30X (any suffix is acceptable, including a, IIS, XS)
Term-Work Petitions.
Students
may
encounter
unforeseen
or
uncontrollable
circumstances
that
can
severely interfere with their ability to fulfil their academic obligations. Some examples of reasons you may
consider submitting a petition: severe personal illness, illness or death of a close family member, personal
or family crisis, or other extenuating circumstances. In this scenario, submit a term-work petition through
the Engineering Portal. Any missed assessments will have their weight transferred to the final exam.
Academic Integrity.
We expect you to follow the University’s Code of Behaviour on Academic Matters.
We will not tolerate any offenses.
Cheating hurts your learning, and your fellow students.
This includes
posting your course Git repository to the public (e.g.
on GitHub).
Note that this policy applies after the
semester as well.
2


## Page 3

University Land Acknowledgement.
I wish to acknowledge this land on which the University of Toronto
operates.
For thousands of years, it has been the traditional land of the Huron-Wendat, the Seneca, and
the Mississaugas of the Credit. Today, this meeting place is still the home to many Indigenous people from
across Turtle Island and we are grateful to have the opportunity to work on this land.
Wellness and Mental Health Support.
As a university student,
you may experience a range of health
and/or mental health challenges that could result in significant barriers to achieving your personal and
academic goals.
Please note, the University of Toronto and the Faculty of Applied Science & Engineering
offer a wide range of free and confidential services that could assist you during these times.
As a U of T Engineering student, you have a Departmental Undergraduate Advisor who can support you
by advising on personal matters that impact your academics.
Other resources that you may find helpful
are listed on the U of T Engineering Mental Health & Wellness webpage.
If you find yourself feeling distressed and in need of more immediate support resources, consider reaching
out to the counsellors at My Student Support Program (MySSP) or visiting U of T Engineering’s Urgent
Support Talk to Someone Right Now.
Accommodations.
We strive to create equitable and inclusive learning environments for everyone in our
community.
The University supports accommodations for students with diverse learning needs,
which
may be associated with (but not limited to) mental health conditions, learning disabilities, ADHD, autism
spectrum, mobility impairments, functional/fine motor impairments, concussion or head injury, blindness
and low vision, chronic health conditions, addictions, deafness and hearing loss, communication disorders
and/or temporary disabilities, such as fractures and severe sprains, or recovery from an operation.
If you have a learning need that requires an accommodation the University of Toronto recommends that
students register as soon as possible with Accessibility Services (AS) at the beginning of the academic
year by visiting. Without registration, you will not be able to verify your situation with your instructors, and
instructors will not be advised about your accommodation needs. AS will assess your situation, develop an
accommodation plan with you, and support you in requesting accommodation for your course work from
your instructor. Remember that the process of accommodation is private: AS will not share details of your
needs or condition with any instructor, and your instructors will not reveal that you are registered with AS.
3

