## Page 1

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO
Faculty of Applied Science and Engineering
MAT291 - Fall 2021
Final Exam - December 10, 2021
Allotted Time: 150 minutes
Instructors: Francis Dawson, Arman Pannu
• DO NOT WRITE ON THE QR CODE AT THE TOP OF THE PAGE OR NEAR
THE STAPLE
• Please have your student id ready and placed on one corner of your desk.
• Read all instructions carefully and justify all your answers. No points will be awarded for a
correct answer without justiﬁcation.
• This exam does not allow any external aids. This includes: calculators, lecture notes, textbooks,
cheat sheets, cell phones, smart watches, etc.
• This exam contains 16 pages (including the title page and spares). Make sure you are not missing
any.
• This exam consists of 6 questions worth 20 marks each for a total of 120 marks. Each question
contains subparts.
• You may use the spare pages for rough work or to write solutions that don’t ﬁt in the allotted
space. Please indicate clearly when writing any part of your solutions on the spare pages.
Formulas
Polar Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Cylindrical Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
z = z
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Spherical Coordinates
x = ρ sin(ϕ) cos(θ)
y = ρ sin(ϕ) sin(θ)
z = ρ cos(ϕ)
1


## Page 2

1. Consider the function:
f(x, y) = y|x|
(a) (2 points) Is f(x, y) continuous at (0, 0)?
(b) (4 points) Do the partial derivatives ∂f
∂x and ∂f
∂y exist at (0, 0)?
(c) (4 points) Recall theorem 15.5 from the textbook:
Suppose the function f has partial derivatives deﬁned on an open set containing (a, b)
with fx and fy continuous at (a, b). Then f is diﬀerentiable at (a, b).
Do the conditions of this theorem hold for the function f(x, y) = y|x| at (0, 0)?
MAT291
Page 2 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 3

(d) (6 points) Show the function is diﬀerentiable at (0, 0).
(e) (4 points) Compute the directional derivative in the direction u = (cos(θ), sin(θ)) of f at
(0, 0) (as a function of θ).
MAT291
Page 3 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 4

2. Let:
F = ⟨−yex2+y2+z, xex2+y2+z, e−(x2+y2)⟩
(a) (4 points) Compute the curl of F.
(b) (2 points) Compute the divergence of F.
(c) (2 points) What does the previous part tell you about
‹
S
F · ndS
where S is an arbitrary closed surface oriented outwards.
MAT291
Page 4 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 5

(d) (12 points) Let S be the top half of the sphere x2 + y2 + z2 = 1, 0 ≤z with orientation in
the positive z-direction. Compute:
¨
S
F · ndS
Hint: It may be easier to compute an integral over the disk x2 + y2 ≤1, z = 0
MAT291
Page 5 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 6

3.
(a) (6 points) Let E be the ellipse 5x2 −6xy + 2y2 ≤1. Consider the change of coordinates:
u = x −y
v = ax + by
For what values of a and b does this change of coordinates map the ellipse E to a unit disk
u2 + v2 ≤1.
(b) (8 points) Compute:
¨
E
(x2 −2xy + y2)dA
Hint: You may use the fact
´ 2π
0
cos2(θ)dθ = π
MAT291
Page 6 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 7

Extra space for part (b):
(c) (6 points) Write a 1D integral to compute the perimeter of the ellipse 5x2 −6xy +2y2 = 1.
Your ﬁnal answer must be of the form:
ˆ b
a
f(t)dt
You don’t need to solve this integral
MAT291
Page 7 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 8

4.
(a) (10 points) Find the volume of the solid between the sphere x2 + y2 + z2 = 19 and the
hyperboloid z2 −x2 −y2 = 1 for z ≥0.
MAT291
Page 8 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 9

(b) (10 points) Find the surface area of the spherical cap in the solid from part (a).
MAT291
Page 9 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 10

5. A spherical shell with inner radius R1 and outer radius R2 is centred on the origin. The spherical
shell has a volumetric charge density ρ = ρor2 where r is measured in a radial direction. A
ﬁlamentary wire with a line charge density λ = λo lies on the zy plane, is parallel to the z axis
and passes through the point y = a where a > R2. A point charge with charge Q is located on
the −y axis at the position ⟨0, −b, 0⟩where b > R2. The total ﬁeld F is equal to zero at the
position (0, c, 0) where R2 < c < a.
(a) (8 points) Sketch the zy trace for this problem and label all relevant geometric and physical
properties.
MAT291
Page 10 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 11

(b) (10 points) Determine the expression for the ﬁeld of the point source, spherical shell and
line charge at the observation point (0, c, 0), in Cartesian coordinates.
Hint: you will need to use the principle of superposition to compute the ﬁeld contributed
by each source using an appropriate coordinate system.
(c) (2 points) Derive an expression relating Q to c, a, b, ρo, λo, R1 and R2.
MAT291
Page 11 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 12

6. A torus (doughnut) with a circular cross section has a conducting sheet wrapped around it.
The axis of rotational symmetry for the torus aligned with the z axis and the torus is bisected
by the xy plane. The radius of the torus is a and the distance as measured on an xy trace
from the innermost contour to the origin and the outermost contour to the origin is R1 and R2
respectively. An xy trace indicates that the surface current ﬂux density has the following form:
−→
J = Jo
r

δ(r −R2) −δ(r −R1)

ˆz
where r is the radial direction in the xy plane. Lastly, R2 > 2(a + R1).
Second, a cylindrical conductor with an outer radius R3 < R1 and an inner radius R4 < R3 < R1
has its axis of symmetry aligned with the z axis and has a uniform current ﬂux density that
ﬂows in the positive z direction with a magnitude of J1.
The magnitude of the vector ﬁeld −→
F at (a + R1, a + R1, 0) is equal to zero.
(a) (8 points) Sketch the xy trace for this problem and label all relevant geometric and physical
properties.
MAT291
Page 12 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 13

(b) (10 points) Determine the expression for the ﬁeld of the toroid and cylindrical conductor
at the observation point (a + R1, a + R1, 0), in Cartesian coordinates.
(c) (2 points) Derive an expression relating J1 to J0, R3 and R4.
MAT291
Page 13 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 14

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 14 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 15

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 15 of 16
December 10, 2021


## Page 16

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 16 of 16
December 10, 2021

