MAT186H1F CALCULUS I: Course Information as of

August 27, 2013

MAT186H1F is an introduction to calculus and its applications. We assume only that you have seen limits and some derivatives in your high school courses. We will start the course with a `review' of trigonometric formulas, and inverse trigonometric functions.

Section Instructors: By now you should be scheduled into one of the following Sections:

<table><tr><td>LEC0101</td><td>Cohen, S.</td><td>LEC0102</td><td>Tyros, K.</td></tr><tr><td>LEC0103</td><td>Burbulla, D.</td><td>LEC0104</td><td>Shorser, L.</td></tr></table>


Textbook: The textbook for this course is Anton, Bivens & Davis's Calculus, Early Transcendentals Version, 10th edition. Any version of this book will do, be it hardcover or binder-ready softcover.

Marking Scheme: WeBWorK Assignments: 5%; Quiz: 15%; Test: 30%; Exam: 50%

Tutorials: You should attend attend your tutorial on a regular basis; it is one place you can get help with your homework, and it is the only place you can pick up your graded tests and have the solutions taken up. One tutorial will be devoted to general advice. Another tutorial will `review' conics, since these are no longer covered in high school. Tutorials start Monday, Sep 9 th and end Monday, Dec 2 nd . There are no tutorials on Monday, Oct 14 th .

Homework: All the odd-numbered exercises have answers in the back; consider them all as homework, although the ones that require a graphing utility or a computer algebra system are optional.

WeBWorK: Information regarding this on-line homework website will be posted on the course website in the second week of classes. WeBWorK homework will not begin until September 23.

Quiz: One 50-min quiz is scheduled in your tutorial during the week of Nov 11-15.

Test: a 100-minute term test is scheduled for Tuesday, Oct 15, 12:10-1:55 PM, locations TBA.

Final Exam: There will be a common final exam, 150 min long, during the exam period, Dec 9-20.

Math Aid Office: GB 149. Hours: MTWRF 12:10-2 PM

Calculators: Use of a Casio FX-991MS or Sharp EL-520X calculator will be permitted during all quizzes, tests and exams. However, it is still your responsibility to explain your work. A correct answer with no justification will receive no marks.

Course Coordinator: D. Burbulla. Office: GB 149 email: burbulla@math.toronto.edu; office hours: MTWRF 12:10-2 PM.

Course Websites: In addition to the course websites which can be accessed through the U of T portal there is the coordinator's home page: http://www.math.toronto.edu/burbulla/

Lecture and Tutorial Schedule: see the back of this page for an approximate schedule of lecture and tutorial topics.

---

<table><tr><td>Chapter</td><td>Section</td><td>Topic</td><td>Lectures</td></tr><tr><td>Before Calculus</td><td>Appx B</td><td>Trigonometry Review</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 0.4</td><td>Inverse Functions; Inverse Trigonometric Functions</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 1.1</td><td>Limits (An Intuitive Approach)</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Limits and Continuity</td><td>Sec 1.2</td><td>Computing Limits</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 1.3</td><td>Limits at Infinity; End Behavior of a Function</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 1.5</td><td>Continuity</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 1.6</td><td>Continuity of Trig, Exponential and Inverse Functions</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 2.1</td><td>Tangent Lines and Rates of Change</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 2.2</td><td>The Derivative Function</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td>The Derivative</td><td>Sec 2.3</td><td>Introduction to Techniques of Differentiation</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td>(high school review)</td><td>Sec 2.4</td><td>The Product and Quotient Rules</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 2.5</td><td>Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 2.6</td><td>The Chain Rule</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 3.1</td><td>Implicit Differentiation</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Topics in Differentiation</td><td>Sec 3.2</td><td>Derivatives of Logarithmic Functions</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 3.3</td><td>Derivatives of Exponential \</td><td>Inverse Trig Functions</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 3.4</td><td>Related Rates</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 3.5</td><td>Local Linear Approximation; Differentials</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 3.6</td><td>L'Hôpital's Rule; Indeterminate Forms</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 4.1</td><td>Increase, Decrease and Concavity</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>The Derivative</td><td>Sec 4.2</td><td>Relative Extrema; Graphing Polynomials</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>in Graphing</td><td>Sec 4.3</td><td>Rational Functions, Cusps and Vertical Tangents</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>and Applications</td><td>Sec 4.4</td><td>Absolute Maxima and Minima</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 4.5</td><td>Applied Maximum and Minimum Problems</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 4.6</td><td>Rectilinear Motion</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 4.7</td><td>Newton's Method</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 4.8</td><td>Rolle's Theorem; Mean Value Theorem</td><td>optional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.1</td><td>An Overview of the Area Problem</td><td>optional</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.2</td><td>The Indefinite Integral</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Integration</td><td>Sec 5.3</td><td>Integration by Substitution</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.4</td><td>The Definition of Area as a Limit; Sigma Notation</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.5</td><td>The Definite Integral</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.6</td><td>The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.7</td><td>Rectilinear Motion Revisited Using Integration</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.8</td><td>Average Value of a Function and its Applications</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 5.9</td><td>Evaluating Definite Integrals by Substitution</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 6.1</td><td>Area Between Two Curves</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Applications of the</td><td>Sec 6.2</td><td>Volumes By Slicing; Discs and Washers</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Definite Integral</td><td>Sec 6.3</td><td>Volumes By Cylindrical Shells</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>in Geometry,</td><td>Sec 6.4</td><td>Length of a Plane Curve</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td>Science and</td><td>Sec 6.5</td><td>Area of a Surface of Revolution</td><td>1/2</td></tr><tr><td>Engineering</td><td>Sec 6.6</td><td>Work</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Sec 6.9</td><td>Hyprebolic Functions and Hanging Cables</td><td>1</td></tr></table>


<table><tr><td>Tut 1: diagnostic tests</td><td>Tut 2: general advice</td><td>Tut 3: conics</td><td>Tut 4: continuity</td></tr><tr><td>Tut 5: pre-test Q \</td><td>A</td><td>Tut 6: related rates</td><td>Tut 7: test returned</td><td>Tut 8: L'Hopital's rule</td></tr><tr><td>Tut 9: pre-quiz Q \</td><td>A</td><td>Tut 10: quiz</td><td>Tut 11: quiz returned</td><td>Tut 12: pre-exam Q \</td><td>A</td></tr></table>


