## Page 1

Final Examination, Fall 2024
Exam Date: December 6, 2024
Course: MAT 291 (Intro to Mathematical Physics)
Duration: 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes)
Examiner: Francis Dawson, Arman Pannu
Name:
e-mail:
@mail.utoronto.ca
Student Number:
Allowable Materials & Instructions to Candidates
• This is a Type A exam and does not allow any external aids. This includes: calculators, lecture notes,
textbooks, cheat sheets, cell phones, smart watches, headphones, etc.
• This exam contains 16 pages (including the title page and spares). Make sure you are not missing any.
• You may use the spare pages for rough work or to write solutions that don’t fit in the allotted space.
Please indicate clearly when writing any part of your solutions on the spare pages. Do not separate
any spare pages from the booklet!
• This exam consists of 6 questions worth 20 marks each for a total of 120 marks. Each question contains
subparts.
• Read all instructions carefully and justify all your answers. No points will be awarded for a correct
answer without justification.
• Read each question carefully. No clarification or content-related questions will be answered. If
you are unsure what the question is asking, use your best judgement and state your assumptions clearly.
If you suspect the question contains a mistake or typo, try to interpret its intent to the best of your
ability and proceed accordingly. It there is a genuine mistake in the questions, they will be addressed
at the grading stage.
Formulas
Polar Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Cylindrical Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
z = z
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Spherical Coordinates
x = ρ sin(φ) cos(θ)
y = ρ sin(φ) sin(θ)
z = ρ cos(φ)


## Page 2

1. Consider the function:
f(x, y) =
(
|xy|
|x|+|y|
(x, y) ̸= (0, 0)
0
(x, y) = (0, 0)
(a) (5 points) Is f continuous at (0, 0)?
(b) (5 points) Compute the gradient of f at (0, 0).
MAT291
Page 2 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 3

(c) (5 points) Using the limit definition of directional derivative, compute Duf(0, 0) for u = ⟨u1, u2⟩.
Your final answer should be in terms of u1 and u2.
Hint to verify your answer: All directional derivatives exist and not all are not equal to zero.
(d) (5 points) Based on your solution in part (b) and (c), what can you say about the differentiability
of f at (0, 0)? Do not check for differentiability directly.
MAT291
Page 3 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 4

2.
(a) (10 points) Compute the area of the region bounded by the skewed parabola (y−x)2−(y+x) = 0
and the line y = 0.
Hint: Use a change of variables that makes the parabola aligned with the axis.
MAT291
Page 4 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 5

(b) (10 points) Compute the area of the region enclosed by the cardioid r = 1 −cos(θ) and the circle
r = 1.
MAT291
Page 5 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 6

3.
(a) (4 points) Plot the function z =

|x| −1
2
in the xz-plane.
Hint: Write it as a piecewise function for x > 0 and x < 0.
(b) (6 points) Let F = ⟨1, y2 −y, x2⟩. Without using divergence theorem, compute:
˚
R
∇· FdV
where R is the region in R3 bounded by the graph of z =

|x| −1
2
and the planes: x = −1,
x = 1, y = 0, y = 1 and z = 0.
MAT291
Page 6 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 7

(c) (10 points) Verify your answer in part (b) using divergence theorem.
Reminder:
F = ⟨1, y2 −y, x2⟩and R is the region in R3 bounded by the graph of z =

|x| −1
2
and the planes: x = −1, x = 1, y = 0, y = 1 and z = 0.
MAT291
Page 7 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 8

4. Consider the curve C given by the parameterization: r(t) =

cos(πt), sin(πt), t2 −t

for 0 ≤t ≤1.
(a) (6 points) Set up a single variable integral to solve for the arc length of C. Simplify your answer
as much as possible but you do not need to solve the final integral.
(b) (4 points) Consider the vector field F =

x2 + yz, y2ey + xz, log(1 + z2) + xy

. Compute ∇× F.
Hint to verify your answer: Your final answer should be a constant.
MAT291
Page 8 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 9

(c) (10 points) Compute the circulation
´
C F · ˆTds where C and F are the curves and vector fields
from part (a) and (b).
Reminder: F =

x2+yz, y2ey+xz, log(1+z2)+xy

and C is given by r(t) =

cos(πt), sin(πt), t2−t

for 0 ≤t ≤1.
Hint: Complete the curve to make it closed and then use Stokes’ theorem.
MAT291
Page 9 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 10

5. Spherical shell 1 of radius R1 and surface charge density σ is centered at (0, 0, d). Spherical shell 2
with inner radius R2 and outer radius R3 is centered at (0, 0, −d) and has charge density given by
ρ(r) = −ρ0r2 for R2 ≤r ≤R3 and zero elsewhere. ρ0 and d are positive constants. Assume the
total charge on spherical shell 1 is positive and that the total charge on spherical shell 2 has the same
magnitude as spherical shell 1 but opposite polarity. Also assume that R3 and R1 are less than d.
(a) (6 points) Sketch a zy-trace and show all important geometrical and physical properties.
(b) (5 points) Compute the field exterior to each spherical shell in an appropriate coordinate system
assuming each object has its point of symmetry aligned with the origin.
MAT291
Page 10 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 11

(c) (5 points) Determine the field for each spherical shell along the y-axis for all y. The answer should
be in Cartesian coordinates.
(d) (4 points) Compute the total field along the y-axis and determine the relationship between σ and
R1, R2, R3 and ρ0.
MAT291
Page 11 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 12

6. Cylindrical shell 1 of radius R1, infinite length and surface current flux density JS is centered at
(0, 0, d). The current flux density Jcyl 1 is in the −ˆx direction. Cylindrical shell 2 with infinite length
inner radius R2, and outer radius R3 is centered at (0, 0, −d). The current flux density Jcyl 2 is given
by Jcyl 2 = J0r2ˆx for R2 ≤r ≤R3 and zero elsewhere. J0, JS and d are positive constants. Assume the
magnitude of the current flux I on cylindrical shell 1 and cylindrical shell 2 is the same. Also assume
that R3 and R1 are less than d.
(a) (6 points) Sketch a zy trace and show all important geometrical and physical properties
(b) (5 points) Compute the field exterior to each cylindrical shell in an appropriate coordinate system
assuming each object has its axis of symmetry aligned with the x axis.
MAT291
Page 12 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 13

(c) (5 points) Determine the field for each cylindrical shell along the y-axis for all y. The answer
should be in Cartesian coordinates.
(d) (4 points) Compute the total field along the y-axis and determine the relationship between JS
and R1, R2, R3 and J0.
MAT291
Page 13 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 14

Do not detach this page from your exam! It may be used as scrap or extra space.
MAT291
Page 14 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 15

Do not detach this page from your exam! It may be used as scrap or extra space.
MAT291
Page 15 of 16
December 6, 2024


## Page 16

Do not detach this page from your exam! It may be used as scrap or extra space.
MAT291
Page 16 of 16
December 6, 2024

