## Page 1

Final Examination, Fall 2023
Exam Date: December 8, 2023
Course: MAT 291 (Calculus III)
Duration: 2 hours and 30 minutes (150 minutes)
Examiner: Francis Dawson, Arman Pannu
Name:
e-mail:
@mail.utoronto.ca
Student Number:
Allowable Materials & Instructions to Candidates
• This is a Type A exam and does not allow any external aids. This includes: calculators, lecture notes,
textbooks, cheat sheets, cell phones, smart watches, headphones, etc.
• This exam contains 16 pages (including the title page and spares). Make sure you are not missing any.
• You may use the spare pages for rough work or to write solutions that don’t ﬁt in the allotted space.
Please indicate clearly when writing any part of your solutions on the spare pages. Do not separate
any spare pages from the booklet!
• This exam consists of 6 questions worth 20 marks each for a total of 120 marks. Each question contains
subparts.
• Read all instructions carefully and justify all your answers. No points will be awarded for a correct
answer without justiﬁcation.
• Read each question carefully.
No clariﬁcation questions will be answered.
(unless there is a
mistake in the question)
Formulas
Polar Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Cylindrical Coordinates
x = r cos(θ)
y = r sin(θ)
z = z
ˆr = cos(θ)ˆx + sin(θ)ˆy
ˆθ = −sin(θ)ˆx + cos(θ)ˆy
Spherical Coordinates
x = ρ sin(ϕ) cos(θ)
y = ρ sin(ϕ) sin(θ)
z = ρ cos(ϕ)


## Page 2

1.
(a) (5 points) Sketch the domain of the function:
f(x, y) =
p
yx(y −x2)
(b) (5 points) Evaluate the following limit or show it doesn’t exist
lim
(x,y)→(1,2)
1 + x −y
x + y −3
MAT291
Page 2 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 3

(c) (5 points) Is the following function diﬀerentiable at (0, 0)?
f(x, y) =
(
x2+y
√
x2+y2
if (x, y) ̸= (0, 0)
0
if (x, y) = (0, 0)
(d) (5 points) Compute the directional derivative of the following function at (0, 0) in the direction
u = ⟨u1, u2⟩? (You may assume that u is a unit vector.)
f(x, y) =
(
x2y
x2+y2
if (x, y) ̸= (0, 0)
0
if (x, y) = (0, 0)
MAT291
Page 3 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 4

2.
(a) (10 points) Compute the integral
˜
R xdA where R is the parallelogram with vertices (0, 0), (1, 1),
(2, 1) and (3, 2).
Hint: Use change of variables
MAT291
Page 4 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 5

(b) (10 points) Compute the volume of the parallelepiped bounded by y −2x = 0, y −2x = 1,
z −3y = 0, z −3y = 1, z −4x = 0, and z −4x = 3.
Hint: Use change of variables
MAT291
Page 5 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 6

3. Consider the vector ﬁeld:
F(x, y, z) = ⟨e−(z−x)2, (2xy −2yz)e−(z−x)2, 3 −z⟩
(a) (2 points) Compute ∇· F
(b) (6 points) Compute
˝
R ∇·FdV where R is the cylinder x2 +y2 ≤1 bounded below by the plane
z = 0 and above by the plane z −x = 3
MAT291
Page 6 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 7

(c) (12 points) Compute the ﬂux through the surface S x2 + y2 = 1 bounded below by the plane
z = 0 and above by the plane z −x = 3 oriented outwards (away from z-axis). Hint: Use part
(b) and divergence theorem.
MAT291
Page 7 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 8

4. Consider the vector ﬁeld F(x, y, z) = ⟨z −yz, xz, x⟩
(a) (4 points) Compute ∇× F.
As a means of verifying your answer, you should have ∇× F(1, 1, 1) = ⟨−1, −1, 2⟩. Verify this is
true since an incorrect computation here could make part (b) very diﬃcult or unsolvable.
(b) (8 points) Compute the outward ﬂux of ∇×F over S where S is the part of the sphere x2+y2+z2 =
4 that lies below the plane z = 1 without using Stoke’s theorem.
Hint:
´
sin3(x)dx =
1
12 cos(3x) −3
4 cos(x)
MAT291
Page 8 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 9

(c) (8 points) Use Stoke’s theorem to verify your answer to part (b)
MAT291
Page 9 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 10

5. An inﬁnitely long cylinder has an inner radius R1 and an outer radius R2. The cylinder has its axis
of symmetry aligned with the y-axis that passes through the origin. The cylinder has a hollowed-out
cylindrical region of radius R3. The axis of symmetry of the hollowed-out cylinder is aligned with the
y-axis and passes through the point (R4, 0, 0) where 0 < R1 < R4 −R3 and 0 < R4 + R3 < R2. The
charge density in the part of the cylinder that is not hollowed out is uniform and equal to ρo. Lastly, a
ﬁlament with uniform charge density λ is parallel to the y axis and passes through the point (0, 0, 0).
The measurement point is (−R4, 0, 0).
(a) (8 points) Sketch a zx-trace and show all important geometrical and physical properties.
(b) (5 points) Compute the ﬁeld for each object in the appropriate region and coordinate system
assuming each object has its axis of symmetry aligned with the y-axis.
MAT291
Page 10 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 11

(c) (5 points) Determine the ﬁeld for each object at location (−R4, 0, 0). The answer should be in
Cartesian coordinates.
(d) (2 points) The total ﬁeld at location (−R4, 0, 0) is equal to zero.
Formulate a mathematical
expression for λ in terms of ρo, R1, R2, R3 and R4.
MAT291
Page 11 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 12

6. Two nested circular toroids (donuts) are oﬀset by a distance d in the y direction, as shown in the
accompanying zy trace. A helical ﬁlamentary winding is wound on each toroid where R2 < d < R1
and R1 < D
2 . The current ﬂux density in ﬁlamentary windings 1 and 2 is given by J1 and J2 respectively
and the magnitude of the current ﬂux in ﬁlamentary windings 1 and 2 is given by I1 and I2 respectively.
Winding 1 has N1 turns and winding 2 has N2 turns.
The total ﬁeld Ftot is measured at the following position: (
q
( D
2 )2 −d2, 0, 0).
(a) (8 points) Sketch an xy trace for the nested toroids (donuts), show all important geometrical and
physical properties and include the position of the measurement point.
MAT291
Page 12 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 13

(b) (10 points) Compute the ﬁeld for each object at the measurement position. The answers should
be in Cartesian coordinates.
(c) (2 points) Compute the total ﬁeld at the measurement position (
q
( D
2 )2 −d2, 0, 0).
MAT291
Page 13 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 14

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 14 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 15

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 15 of 16
December 8, 2023


## Page 16

This page is intentionally left blank.
MAT291
Page 16 of 16
December 8, 2023

